Regional Variation in Earnings Inequality in Reform-Era Urban China
Author(s): Yu Xie and Emily Hannum

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 101, No. 4 (Tan., 1996), pp. 950-992
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2782235

Accessed: 08-06-2016 04:12 UTC
! This research was supported by a Young Investigator Award from the National
Science Foundation to Yu Xie and an NICHD traineeship to Emily Hannum. Earlier
versions of this paper were presented at the 1994 winter workshop of the Insti-
tute for Research on Poverty and the 1994 World Congress of Sociology (Research
Committee on Social Stratification), Bielefeld, Germany. The authors are grateful to
the participants at the two presentations as well as to John Bound, Albert Her-
malin, David Lam, Victor Nee, and William L. Parish for their comments and
criticisms. We particularly thank Bill Parish for urging us in the direction of
decomposing total earnings. The opinions expressed herein are those of the au-
thors. Working data files generated in this study and additional statistical results
are available upon request. Direct all correspondence to Yu Xie, Department of
Sociology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-1382. E-mail:
yuxie@umich.edu

© 1996 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved.
0002-9602/96/10104-0005$01.50
adjusted yuan, an average annual rate of 6.07%.’ Against the backdrop
of an unstable economy and the Maoist egalitarian ethos in prereform
China (Riskin 1987),° this drastic economic boost has spurred new inter-
est among social scientists in understanding the consequences of economic
reforms for income and wealth distribution in China (Trescott 1985; Adel-
man and Sunding 1987; Walder 1987, 1990, 1992a, 1992b; Riskin 1987;
Hsiung and Putterman 1989; Nee 1989, 1991, 1994, 1996; Gelb 1990;
Zhao 1990; Li 1991; Zhu 1991; Peng 1992; Khan et al. 1992; Griffin and
Zhao 1993; Selden 1993; Xin 1994). These researchers have been in-
trigued by two fundamental questions: (1) Do economic reforms increase
or reduce inequality? and (2) Do economic reforms disproportionately
benefit certain social groups at the expense of others? Indeed, these two
questions have dominated all theoretical discussions among sociologists
of postsocialist or reforming-socialist economies. Such discussions were
recently summarized by Réna-Tas (1994, table 1).*

With the exception of Khan et al. (1992), Knight and Song (1993), and
Nee (1994, 1996), studies of the consequences of economic reforms in
China typically treat China as a homogeneous entity and disregard enor-
mous regional variations, even when data used are regional and unrepre-
sentative of China as a whole. This practice, while sensible when Chinese
data were scarce, should no longer be continued, as China is a vast
country with spatially heterogeneous economies (Linge and Forbes 1990;
Li 1993). Ignoring China’s spatial heterogeneity during economic reforms
is particularly striking in light of the fact that “dozens of books and
hundreds of journal articles” have focused on the reform in Hungary
alone (Kornai 1989, p. 32), a country smaller in population size than 25
of China’s 30 province-level administrative units.°

Consideration of regional heterogeneity is significant, not only because
economic activities in different parts of China are dictated by large re-
gional variations in natural and human resources, but also, and more
important, because the Chinese industrial reform has had a regional di-
mension. Aguignier (1988), Falkenheim (1988), Shirk (1989), Linge and
Forbes (1990), and Li (1991, 1993) all document that the reform has
disproportionately benefited coastal provinces at the expense of inland
provinces and that serious tensions across regions have resulted. What
has often been overlooked, however, is that the increasing regional dis-
parities were part of a deliberate scheme from the outset. There are
several reasons for this. First, the central government thought it was
“less dangerous . . . to carry out the initial experiments in a distant
province [such as Guangdong] rather than in Tianjin, Shanghai, or else-
where in the country’s industrial heartland” (Linge and Forbes 1990, p.
15). Since the experiments were contained in restricted regions, their
failure would not have been catastrophic to the national economy. Sec-
ond, following a long-standing practice in prereform China, Chinese re-
formers wished to set up a few exemplary models to showcase the indus-
trial reform. Channeling government resources and foreign investment
to limited regions would greatly enhance the likelihood of success. At the
core of the Chinese Communist Party’s plan for economic reforms has
been the slogan, “Let certain people become rich first in order to achieve
common prosperity” (Zhao 1994, p. 115). It is hoped that the affluence
of the coastal regions will trickle down to the remote hinterlands, as the
whole country starts to emulate the success of the coastal regions. Finally,
Chinese leaders learned the value of decentralization from the agricul-
tural reform and encouraged it during the early stages of the industrial
reform, allowing local governments to use their comparative advantages
and to “sidestep their ‘shortcomings’” (Falkenheim 1988, p. 287). This
permission to use comparative advantage was a primary reason for the
rise of Shenzhen, near the border between Guangdong and Hong Kong,
from a small town to a sizable metropolis with a vibrant economy and a
major stock market.

With data from a 1988 national income survey of 9,009 urban house-
holds, this article studies the regional variation in earnings inequality in
A BASELINE HUMAN CAPITAL MODEL

We modify Mincer’s (1974) human capital model for contemporary China
into the form of

T = log ¥ = By + BX; + BX, + BX}
+ BX, + BsXs + PX Xs + €,

(1)

where Y is earnings, X, years of schooling, X, years of work experience,
X, a dummy variable denoting membership in the Communist Party of
China (1 = party member), and X; a dummy variable denoting gender
(1 = female). All B’s are unknown parameters, and « is the residual
unexplained by the model. Equation (1) deviates from Mincer’s model
in two ways. First, we include party membership in the model and inter-
pret it as an aspect of human capital associated with political advan-
tages.° Past research (e.g., Walder 1990; Knight and Song 1993) clearly
documents the importance of party membership and lends support to our
interpretation. Second, we apply the model to both male and female
workers and allow for differences between the sexes in the intercept as
well as in the return to years of schooling. Inclusion of women into the
earnings equation improves upon similar models based on data only from
male workers for the United States and other countries. The common
practice of excluding women often stems from the difficulty of dealing
with women not currently participating in the labor force. For contempo-
rary China, however, this difficulty does not arise as women’s labor force
participation is nearly universal. We will discuss the justification for
including the interaction between gender and education later.

For estimation, we use data from the 1988 Chinese Household Income
Project (CHIP). CHIP encompassed two surveys, one for urban residents
and another for rural residents. For this article, we use data only from
the urban portion of the study. The urban survey follows a multistage
sampling methodology, with the first step being to select 10 province-level
administrative units (out of a total of 30) and then 55 cities (out of a total
of 434) to represent varying urban conditions in China (Eichen and Zhang
1993). The urban survey instrument was administered to a total of 9,009
households in March and April 1989.

The survey gathered information pertaining to all household members,
including demographic and educational characteristics and labor force
activities. For this analysis, we make an unrealistic but convenient as-
sumption that within-household clustering is negligibly small. That is,
we treat all members of sampled households who are between ages 20
and 59 and active in the labor force as independent observations. Com-
bined with other criteria for excluding respondents with missing or in-
complete data, this procedure yields a sample of 15,862 cases.’

As a study of income, the CHIP survey instruments were carefully
tailored to capture all forms of income in 1988, including the provision
of cash bonuses and subsidies. Major findings from the study are pub-
lished in a book edited by Griffin and Zhao (1993). In this article, we
are concerned with the cash compensation that individual workers earn
at the workplace. Specifically, our measure of earnings (Y) contains the
following three components: (a) (regular monthly salary/wage) x 12,
denoted by Y,; (b) (monthly average of cash bonuses and subsidies) x
12, denoted by Y,; and (c) 1988 annual earnings from private businesses,
denoted by Y,. The last component plays a negligible role (about 1% of
total earnings). Between the first two forms of earnings, regular salary/
wage (Y,) is slightly more important.®

Following Mincer (1974, p. 48), we extrapolate years of schooling from
levels of attained education (less then three years of schooling = 1; three
years of schooling but less than primary school = 4; primary school =
6; lower middle school = 9; upper middle school = 12; trade school =
13; community/technical college = 15; and college and graduate school
= 17). Given the relatively unfamiliar and poorly understood setting of
contemporary China, the conservative treatment of education as a truly
categorical variable (in levels of attained education) has been wisely
adopted by many researchers (e.g., Peng 1992; Khan et al. 1992; Griffin
and Zhao 1993; Nee 1994, 1996). However, an interval measure in years
of schooling is preferred for our study due to three important consider-
ations. First, the theoretical framework of human capital requires that
education be considered in years of schooling as a primary source and
thus cost of investment (Mincer 1974). Second, with log of earnings as
the dependent variable as in equation (1), the coefficient for years of
schooling can be interpreted readily as the rate of return and compared
cross-nationally (Psacharopoulos 1981). Finally, a one-degree-of-freedom
specification for education effects allows us to conveniently analyze geo-
graphic variation in returns to schooling in relation to the local economic
context. Even if the stringent linearity specification is imperfect, it may
be a good approximation. To check the suitability of this simplifying
specification, we will conduct a sensitivity analysis.

We also follow Mincer (1974, p. 48) in calculating years of work experi-
ence as the difference between the current age and the age at first year
of experience, which varies with education (primary school and lower =
14; lower middle school = 16; upper middle school = 19; trade school
= 20; community/technical college = 22; and college and graduate
school = 24). Again, this parameterization is dictated by the choice to
build our baseline model on human capital theory, which requires that
“it is experience rather than age that enters as an independent variable
(in order to distinguish between the biological and human capital effects
of time)” (Psacharopoulos 1977, p. 40).

The first column of table 1 presents ordinary least squares (OLS) esti-
mates of equation (1) with the constraint 8B, = 0. Thus, model 1 forces
the effect of schooling to be parallel between men and women. With this
rather restricted model, we begin to draw some general inferences about
the earnings determination in urban China. The negative estimates for
8, confirm the expectation from human capital theory that the experience
effect should be concave, first increasing for most of the working life and
then declining toward the end of the working life (Mincer 1974, p. 84).
According to model 2, the optimal level of experience is 33.2 years, a
figure close to the 33.8 years implied by Mincer’s (1974, p. 92) estimates
for the United States.°
“ssay 10 Kaeumd = popnpxg »

“(1) ‘ba jo sayeumnjse sarenbs sea] Areurpso 03 Jayar s,g “(uend) sButusea [enuue [e303 Jo wWYyIedO] eINyeU oy} st (J) axJqeuea Juapuadap ayy “z98‘ST = A7—“ILON.

 

61°97

      

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

£L°97 $197 * (%) a

Lv8‘ST Sse‘st 9s8‘ST ~ £

o-091‘z ST19T‘Z 7 6LT'Z ** Joq1a sarenbs jo wing
T¢0" tLe" “"* gaoqe pue o8a][0> 1ea4-1n0,F
620° 182° * a8aqjoo AyunuWIOD,
¢Z0° $97" Jooyps yesiuysay,
120° £12" “+ JooyDs YStYy JoTUES
610° elt" “+ yooyss ysty Jorun{

:UOTeINpa Jo [aAa] pue Japues Jo Vor} Ie19}UT

z00° 270° *** (9g) Butjooyps Jo sreak x Japuary

410° zoe’ — 120° ve — 900° PED erreeerteeererersesesececees (g) (eqeutey = 1) Jopusn

300° LO" 800° £10" 800° 110) ("g) (S04 = 1) Joquiout Kreg

s-O1(19°Z) +-O1(SZ°L—) s-O1(¥$"2) +-01(€6°9—) s-OT(b$"2) pOT(E9Q—) rere tteeerssceeeseeeesces (fg) ,eouariedxg

100" +0" 100° 9+0" 100" PHO eter eetsetenesesecereceeceenecceces (4g) eouarredxg
610° OCC nner nnn cent ene nne aAoqe pue aZa[[od read-1n0
020° Lev" * a8aqjoo AyrunuWI0D,
810° z80° Jooyps festuysay,
910° TL0° ** Jooyss YyBIY JoTUIas
sto" 800° — + yooyss ysty sorun{

4 UOTWBINP Jo Jara]

100° 220° 100" TO" * (ig) Surpooyss jo sxea

L10° 0289 610° $89°9 Z10° TOS eee eirrtrtrttreseerersererererensenseees * Og) ydeosaquy

as Jojourereg as sojourereg as sojourereg HIAVRIVA INTONSATANT

€ TaG0—W Zz TaqOW 1 Tago

 

 

ALIDNADOWOH TVNOIOTY ONINASSY SONINUVY IVLOL YOA STAGOP] NOISSTAOTY AGAHL,

T aTavL
According to model 1, the estimated return in earnings to years of
schooling is 3.1%. By international standards, this figure is extremely
small. In his review with an emphasis on international comparison, Psa-
charopoulos (1981, p. 330) places the rate of return to education between
5.9% (for Canada) and 22.8% (for Malaysia). The very low estimated
rate of return for China is particularly puzzling in light of China’s status
as a less developed country and its rapid economic growth since 1978.
Both of these traits are commonly associated with high returns to educa-
tion. Psacharopoulos (1981) reports that the rate of return tends to be
higher in less developed countries (with an average of 14.4%) than in
more economically advanced countries (with an average of 7.7%). Eco-
nomic reasoning also predicts that the return to schooling is positively
related to the rate of economic growth because “individuals who are
more efficient resource allocators will be better able to take advantage
of the changed opportunity sets” (Chiswick 1971, p. 28).

We have no reason to doubt the reliability of the CHIP data in light
of the low estimated return to education, for many other studies have
also found similarly low rates of return to education in China using
independent data sources. From a sample drawn in Nanjing, for exam-
ple, Byron and Manaloto (1990, p. 790) report an “astonishingly low
rate of return of income to education, about 4% for each additional
year of schooling.”!° From a Tianjin sample, Walder (1990, pp. 149-50)
estimates a 1.0% rate of return in income and a 1.6% rate of return in
salary. In addition, earlier research on selected Chinese subpopulations
found education to have either no effect (e.g., Whyte and Parish 1984;
Zhu 1991) or negative effects (e.g., Gelb 1990; Peng 1992; Nee 1994) on
income. Thus, we are reassured by the consistency of the low rate of
return to education estimated in model 1 with the relevant literature.

Coefficient B, reveals the advantage of being a member of the Commu-
nist Party of China. According to model 1, party members earn about
7.4% more than nonmembers net of education, experience, and gender.
This estimate is close to the 9% party premium reported by Walder (1990,
p. 150) for the 1976 and 1986 salaries of a Tianjin sample. As cautioned
by Knight and Song (1993, pp. 253-59), however, the effect of party
membership may not be causal. The party may selectively recruit work-
ers possessing characteristics associated with high productivity, some of
which may be unobserved and thus unconsidered here. In any event, our
interest in using party membership is to detect the regional variation in
party membership effects. Unless the potential selectivity varies substan-
tially across regions, using party membership as an indicator of positional
power should serve our purpose well.'!

The estimate for 8; in model 1 indicates that women on average earn
about 10.8% less than men of equal education, experience, and party
status. This estimate is consistent with those reported by Byron and
Manaloto (1990), Gelb (1990), Peng (1992), Walder (1990), and Knight
and Song (1993), which range from 5 to 14%. Although the gender gap
is relatively small by international standards,” it nonetheless exists and is
substantial despite the Chinese government’s rhetoric on gender equality
dating from the founding of the People’s Republic of China in 1949 (for
a review, see Hannum and Xie 1994). The gender gap in earnings, how-
ever, is not the same across the spectrum of educational attainment. In
model 2, we test the interaction between gender and schooling.

Model 2 allows B, to be free and thus contains all of the parameters
specified by equation (1). The F-test statistic from nesting models 1 and
2 is 128 with 1/15,855 degrees of freedom, highly significant, indicating
that the schooling effect is not parallel between men and women. The
positive interaction effect for gender and schooling reveals that the return
to schooling is higher for women than for men. Estimates of model 2
indicate that women’s return to schooling is 4.5%, twice that of men’s
(2.2%). The interaction effect between gender and schooling is essentially
a consequence of women’s significantly lower earnings at low levels of
education.'’ This can be easily seen in figure 1, where the two solid lines
represent the predicted log of earnings as a function of years of schooling,
separated for men and women using the estimates of model 2.

To guard against a possible misspecification of the education effect
through the linearity constraint imposed on models 1 and 2, we conduct
a sensitivity analysis in model 3, which allows for the effect of education
to be distinct at six levels through the use of discrete coding. The F-test
statistic for nesting models 2 and 3 is 1.65 with 8/15,847 degrees of
freedom, not significant at 0.05 level. Thus, the linear specification for
education effects seems to be an acceptable approximation. Figure 1
contrasts predicted earnings by schooling and gender according to models
2 and 3 after controlling for other independent variables. The figure
shows that a linear specification of education leads to a slight underpre-
Log of Earnings (yuan per year) Earnings (yuan per year)

 

 

 

2208
7.6 1998
75 1808
7.4 1636
7.3 1480
7.2 . 1339
7A L L L 1 L 1 1212

4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18

Years of Schooling
-« Linear Effect, Males + Linear Effect, Females
5 Discrete Coding, Males -© Discrete Coding, Females

 

Fic. 1.—Education effects on earnings in China, comparison of two specifica-
tions (based on models 2 and 3 in table 1; other variables are held at sample
means).
log(Y,) and log(Y,) as dependent variables. In fact, this strategy was
adopted by Knight and Song (1993). However, we see two major disad-
vantages with this approach. First, log(Y, + Y,) cannot be decomposed
into linear functions of log(Y,) and log(Y,), and as a result regressions
using log(Y,) and log(Y,) as dependent variables do not have a simple
relationship to regressions using log Y. Second, log(Y,) is undefined for
zero Y,, and log(Y,) for zero Y,. One may argue that a respondent who
does not have a regular salary or wage is not really employed and should
be excluded from an analysis of employment-related earnings. The same
argument does not hold for respondents with zero Y, as it is logically
possible (albeit empirically unlikely) that some workers receive no other
forms of compensation aside from regular salary or wage.'* Recoding
zero values of Y, to a small positive number is also problematic, for
regression results are sensitive to the arbitrary choice of the small
number.

To solve both problems, we devised the following decomposition
method:
Equation (3) also shows that B is a monotonic transformation of Y, for
any fixed Y,. For the convenience of decomposing log Y, we use S and
B as our dependent variables and interpret B as the “bonus share”
among total employment-related earnings. Variation in B essentially indi-
cates the variation in the significance of bonuses and subsidies relative
to the regular salary or wage. If B were constant, bonuses and subsidies
would comprise the same proportion among total employment earnings.

We now apply the baseline model in the form of equation (1) separately
to the two components of log Y, excluding respondents with no regular
salary or wage. The regression estimates are shown in table 2. Note that
parameter estimates are in the same scale across the two equations for
each of the independent variables. Summing them for each row would
give the net effect on log(Y, + Y,), a quantity close to T. It is thus
feasible for us to compare the estimated coefficients for the S and B
equations in table 2 to those for the T equation of model 2 in table 1.
Several interesting results emerge. First, the baseline model does a much
better job in determining regular salary or wage than determining bonus
share. The R? is 44.60% for the salary/wage (S) equation but only 3.27%
for the bonus share (B) equation. Second, the effect of party membership
(B,) resides entirely in the determination of salary/wage. This is easy to
see in the insignificant coefficient of party membership for B and in the
comparable magnitude of the coefficients for S and T (0.075 and 0.073,
respectively). Third, by the same logic, experience affects total earnings
The Model

Although the application of the baseline human capital model of equation
(1) is a useful first step, treating China as a homogeneous entity is both
methodologically untenable and theoretically wasteful. It is methodologi-
cally untenable because regional variation in earnings determination is
substantial, as is shown in appendix table A2. It is theoretically wasteful
because we can capitalize on the regional variation in earnings determina-
tion to test theories relating earnings inequality to the progress of eco-
nomic reforms. Thus, we relax the assumption that the human capital
model in the form of equation (1) is regionally homogeneous.

Taking regional heterogeneity to an extreme, one may treat different
cities as totally different regimes and allow full interactions between cities
and the coefficients of equation (1). Results from this exercise are pre-
sented in appendix table A2. While one may gain some insight by examin-
ing city-specific estimated coefficients, this strategy is unduly conserva-
tive and does not allow us to test theoretically interesting hypotheses.
For example, we would like to know whether the regional variation in
earnings determination can be explained by the regional variation in
economic growth. To this end, we have developed the following multi-
level model with two components, one at the individual level and another
at the city level. Our strategy is similar to that of DiPrete and Grusky
(1990), except that our macrolevel variation is regional rather than tem-
poral.

Using total earnings (YT) again as an illustration, for the ith person
G = 1,... ,) in the kth city, the model at the individual level is
log( viz) = Bor + BieX1ie + Bra X2in + Bs Xin
+ Ban Xaie + BseXsin + Bot iinXsin + Exe.
A distinct feature of equation (4), as compared to equation (1), is that
the coefficients of x, %., x4, and x; (1.e., Bos, Biz, Bre, Baz» and Bz)

vary across cities. Note that a constraint is placed on 8; and B, so that
they do not change with &.'° At the city level, we assume

(4)

Bog = & + Agse + Boss (Sa)
Bu, =O, + AZ, + Mig, (5b)
Bop = &, +22, + Woe, (Sc)
B; = 4s, (5d)
Bap = Og +42, + Pars (Se)
Bsz = Os + As2_ + Hse, (Sf)
Bo = O. (5g)

The city-level variable z measures economic growth. For this study, we
compute z by
That is, 2 measures the change in economic output, or economic growth,
between 1985 and 1988, net of regionally fixed characteristics associated
with economic output such as the size, infrastructure, and natural and
social conditions of local economies (Firebaugh and Beck 1994, p. 636).
In addition, z can be interpreted as a monotonic transformation of the
more familiar growth rate (denoted as 1):

1 = (GPVIjo5 — GPVIog5)/GPVIjog5 = exp(2) — 1.

In appendix table Al, we present z and an annualized growth rate,
along with other city-based descriptive statistics computed from the
CHIP data set.'® We note that z varies widely among the 55 cities, rang-
ing from .19 (corresponding to a 6.54% annual growth rate) for Yang-
quan of Shanxi Province to 1.16 (corresponding to a 47.21% annual
growth rate) for Shenzhen of Guangdong Province. As expected, the
growth rate tends to be higher in the coastal provinces of Guangdong
and Jiangsu than in other provinces.

Our interest centers on how the determinants of earnings vary as a
function of economic growth in China. This is made clearer if we substi-
tute (5) into (4):

2
Log (Viz) = Og + Oy Xyiy + Uy Xrin + ZX 7x + Ag Xaip + As Kein + UX rie Xsiz
Ft ose AX iine + ArKoinde + Ng Laine + As XsinZe (7)
t (Mon + Min iin + Peon Xrie + Man Xain + MseXsin + ix):

The second line of equation (7) represents the interactions of the individ-
ual-level explanatory variables (including the intercept but excluding
squared work experience and gender-education interaction) and the city-
level measure of economic growth. The third line of equation (7) indicates
the composite residual consisting of an individual-level residual and city-
level residuals weighted by individual-level independent variables.

A general two-level model, equation (7) provides the framework for
our analysis of the regional variation in earnings determination (see Ma-
son, Wong, and Entwisle 1983). Some special cases of this model are
worth mentioning:
HYPOTHESES

One interpretation of our measure of economic growth, z, is to treat it
as an indicator of the success of urban economic reforms between 1985
and 1988. Note that z is not an “intention” measure but an “outcome”
measure. If the urban economic reforms have achieved what they were
intended to do, namely to spur economic growth, the distinction is of
minor significance. To the extent that efforts at urban economic reform
have not always been successful (e.g., Shirk 1989; Walder 1992a, 19925),
the distinction is important, for, with the use of z, we are actually assess-
ing the consequences for earnings determination of the success of eco-
nomic reforms rather than of economic reforms themselves. With this
caveat, we formulate the following two hypotheses.

HypotuHEsis 1.—The faster the economic growth, the greater the rate
of return to education.

We derive this hypothesis both from Nee’s (1989) market transition
theory and from Chiswick’s (1971) economic analysis. According to Nee’s
market transition theory, during economic reforms, markets gradually
replace state bureaucracies in reallocating surplus. Since markets “[fa-
vor] direct producers relative to redistributors” and accordingly reward
productivity instead of political loyalty, the transition to a market econ-
omy is likely to give rise to “higher returns of education, which is among
the best indicators of human productivity” (p. 666). If we accept our
measure of economic growth (z) as a valid indicator of the success of
economic reforms and thus market transition, we expect economic
growth to be positively related with the returns to education.

In fact, this prediction preceded Nee’s work on China. In an economic
analysis of the relationship between earnings inequality and economic
development, Chiswick (1971) essentially came to the same conclusion.
Although he does not clearly identify a relationship between the rate of
return and the level of economic development, Chiswick predicts that
“the rate of return is likely to be positively related to the secular rate of
growth of output” (p. 27; emphasis added). Chiswick’s explanation is
that economic growth associated with increased productivity and im-
proved technology tends to provide better opportunities for the educated
labor force, who disproportionately contribute to and derive benefits from
a fast-growing economy. Thus, this economic reasoning leads to the ex-
pectation that our measure of economic growth (z) is positively related
to the rate of return to education. That is, 4, of equation (7) should be
positive.

HypoTuHEsis 2.—The faster the economic growth, the smaller the re-
turns to party membership.

Based on the argument that market forces gradually replace political
hierarchies in determining social stratification, Nee (1989) unambiguously
projects a “decline in the value of political capital” (p. 671) during mar-
ket transition. This is made possible, according to Nee’s market transi-
tion theory, by the public’s increasing reliance on market coordination
and decreasing reliance on state functionaries for economic goods and
services. For support, Nee uses Walder’s findings from a Tianjin survey
that the positive effect of party membership declined between 1976 and
1985 (see Walder 1990). Further, Nee suggests that the extent to which
a socialist economy is replaced by a market economy can vary substan-
tially by region and sector and that such variations have direct implica-
tions for social stratification (1989, p. 667). In our analysis, we operation-
alize Nee’s suggestion through a multilevel model with a macrolevel z
variable measuring the success of market transition. If Nee’s prediction
is correct, we expect to see a negative coefficient for \,.

Besides these two hypotheses, we are interested in the interaction ef-
fects between economic growth and work experience (A,) and between
economic growth and gender (A;), although our theoretical expectations
for these interactions are not clear-cut. Work experience may be more
important in the old redistributive economy because experience is built
into bureaucratic formulas for setting salaries under the old regime but
is subject to market regulations under the new regime. If experience
boosts productivity by an amount that exceeds the experience schedule
for pay formally set by bureaucratic formulas, experience should be posi-
tively related to economic growth. However, we have no good reason to
endorse this proposition, especially in light of the fact that experience may
become quickly obsolete in a fast-growing economy. Thus, we postpone
theoretical discussions about the relationship between economic growth
and the returns to work experience until empirical results are presented.

In a similar fashion, we are reluctant to form an unequivocal hypothe-
sis concerning the relationship between the gender gap in earnings and
economic growth. Fears that economic reforms will exacerbate gender
inequalities have been voiced (e.g., Trescott 1985). Clearly, the main
source of the fears lies in the erosion of the government’s ability to imple-
ment socialist affirmative-action-type programs aimed at reducing gender
inequalities. In other words, if gender inequalities are held to a low level
by government interventions, they may climb during the transition to
markets. However, Walder (1990) challenges this speculation and reports
evidence instead for the narrowing of the gender gap in income.

We follow our earlier strategy of decomposing the logarithm of total
earnings (J) into a regular salary/wage component (S) and a bonus/
subsidy share component (B) within the multilevel model frame-
work. Not only are we interested in testing hypotheses concerning
how economic growth influences the effects of schooling and party
membership on total earnings, we would also like to know if the influ-
ence of economic growth works through regular salaries and wages
or through bonuses and subsidies. Even when economic growth is un-
related to the effects of individual-level determinants on total earnings,
it may influence the effects of the individual-level determinants on
the regular salary/wage and the bonus/subsidy share in different direc-
tions.
distribution. Thus, we make this additional normality assumption in
order to facilitate statistical inference.”°

We estimate a series of parallel models for the 7, S, and B dependent
variables with the same sample restrictions associated with these depen-
dent variables for models reported in tables 1 and 2. In table 3, we
present goodness-of-fit statistics for three such models, which are modifi-
cations of equation (7). The first model is the variance components model
in which all \’s, w 1, 2, by, and ws are constrained to be zero. Its
departure from the regionally homogeneous model (model 2 of table 1) is
the introduction of a random component for the intercept (i.e., uo). Nine
parameters, seven coefficients (a), @1, 2, @3, 4, @s, and a,) and two
residual variances (var[e] and var[y.9]) are estimated for this model. For
the random coefficients model, we further allow four w’s (1, M2, Wa;
and ys) to contribute to their corresponding B coefficients. Since the two
models are nested, we can assess the improvement in goodness of fit by
taking the difference in the log-likelihood ratio statistic (L’) to form a
chi-square test. As shown in the last two columns, the contrast yields a
chi-square test statistic with four degrees of freedom. For each of the
three dependent variables, the random coefficients model is preferred to
the simpler variance components model, since the chi-square test statistic
is significant.

In the full model, we further allow our city-level variable z to affect
individual-level coefficients. That is, X), 1, X42, Ag, and A; are now
allowed to be freely estimated. The full model consumes five more de-
grees of freedom than the random coefficients model. Again, we use a
chi-square test (with df = 5) to assess the improvement in goodness of
fit as we move from the random coefficients model to the full model. For
all of the three dependent variables, the chi-square test is in favor of the
full model at a P value less than or equal to 0.001. Note that the chi-
square tests reported in table 3 are “composite” tests in the sense that
they test several hypotheses simultaneously. Rejection of the simpler
model thus does not mean that the additional parameters in the more
complicated model should all be included. Although we initially tried to
simplify the full model by trimming unnecessary parameters, we decided
to report the full model to maintain consistency across the three depen-
dent variables and discuss significance tests associated with individual
parameters. For all three dependent variables, the estimated parameters
of the full model and their estimated standard errors are reported in
table 4.

We first examine the estimated parameters for the total earnings (7)
equation. The exponential transformation of the estimated microlevel
intercept (exp[6.384] = 592.3) should be interpreted as the mean earnings
for a hypothetical group: male nonmembers with no schooling and no
work experience living in a city that experienced no economic growth.
In our approach of allowing the intercept to vary across cities, the inter-
cept has a structural component (Az) and a random component (jt).
The estimated A, (under “Micro-macro interactive coefficients” in table
4) is significantly positive. This is to be expected, as more economic
growth generates more economic wealth for redistribution to workers in
the local labor force. Since z varies from 0.19 to 1.16 in our data, the
estimated \, of 0.685 would contribute between 0.130 and 0.795 to the
baseline intercept term of 6.384. This result shows clearly that economic
growth has a very significant effect on the level of earnings. The decom-
positional results from the second and third columns of table 4 show that
the increase in the level of earnings associated with economic growth
occurs mostly through the bonus share component rather than through
regular salaries and wages (0.440 vs. 0.261, respectively). That is, the
“¢ 91qe} UT SmOr ,JepoUr TNA, O43 UF

payiodas are sjapour aay} asay} 103 soNsTEIs 3Y-Jo-ssaupooy “payeumnsa st (1) “ba Jo ULAOJ ay} Ut [apoUt JaAarH{Nur [NJ ay} ‘satqeLTeA Juapuadep dary} ay} Jo [Te 10.J—"ALON

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

100° 190° 100° 190° 100° BOT erretrtrrtsreseseesecersareaceceesescsececerees (a)7ea
syuouoduiod a2ueLIeA ]PAI[OIOITAL
000° 000° »-O1(ST"9) ¢-OT(8T'2) y-OT(08"8) e-OT(hS'Z) [m)ze] (e7eurey = 1) Jepuen,
»-OT(00'b) y-OT(L9°L) »-OT(ST"€) »-OT(ZS"€) y-OT(bT"9) p-O1(26°8) [zea] (Sek = 1) requiour Ayeg
,-01(29°9) 9-O1(82'T) 1-OT(LL°L) 9-O1(€8'T) 9-01 (02'T) g-OT(Lb'Z) rr errrerresssrees [(@n) zea] aouetedxg
9-OT(4$"9) ¢-OT(0E"T) 9-O1(S0'6) ¢-OT(PS"2) ¢-OT(62'T) ¢-O1($6°Z) * [('n) zea] Zutjooyps Jo sxea A
¢-O1(9L'2) 7-01(92'T) ¢-OT(TZ°2) 7-O1(€T'T) ¢-0T(02'S) 2-OU(T EZ) rr ereerrerseerrssseres [(1) rea] ydaoz03uy
syuauodulod aoue1eA aAafoIIVIL
020° 480° — seo" £s0" £b0" 600° — (EX) @Teutay = 1) apuay
Te0" Oro" 620° +10 — 6£0° 620° (PX) (624 = 1) sequiew Ayeg
100" 000° 100" soo" — z00° 400° — (2x) aouatadxg
+00" 600° — 00° $00" — 900° LTO rereeneeeeetreneressess ('x) Burpooyps Jo sea
480° Orr’ $30" 192° oIT $39" s+ (Oy) ydaoraqUy
:SJUIIYJ90I IATIVIIUL OIIVW-OINTA
100° 800° TOO" €10° z00° TZ0° (99) Sulpooyss Jo sxeak x Japuar)
L10" $90° £20" 27" — 820° TEE rr rrereseeessess ($0) (eyeuray = 1) Jepuen
sto" £10" — +10" 80° 610° 140° * (®) (sa = = =D Jequieu Ayreg
¢-OT(S2‘T) »-O1(TL'7—) ¢-OT(SL'T) y-O1(9b'€—) OT (0€"2) »-O1(Se9—) * () Aouatiadxg
TOO" 200° 100: L£0° 100° sro" + (%) souatedxy
200° 200° — 200° eo" £00" O20 rreeetrirreretresessssss ('») Buyjooyrs jo sieax
+v0" evr £+0" Le6'S 6s0° v8e'9 verses (Ox) ydaosaquy
1SJUSIOYJ909 [IAd]OII IPT
as daqjauIeIeg as aaqjourereg as dqourereg

 

(gq) TAvHS sANOg

(§) TOVM/AAVIVS

(Z) SONINAVY TVLOL

 

SATAVINVA INSGNadaq AIAH] YOd TAGO| TAAATILTIAYL TINY AHL JO SAALAWVAVG AALVWILSY

v ATEVL
main reason for higher earnings in fast-growing cities is that workers
living in such cities tend to receive a higher proportion of earnings in the
form of bonuses and subsidies.

The effect of schooling on total earnings is 0.029 for males and 0.050
for females when economic growth is held at zero. Surprisingly, the edu-
cation effect on total earnings is negatively related to economic growth
(z), as the estimated A, is —0.017 with an estimated standard error of
0.006. Within the observed range of variation, z contributes between
—0.003 and —0.020 to the baseline education effect of 0.029. Although
the negative influence of economic growth does not reverse the sign of
the education effect, it can reduce it by as much as two-thirds. While ),
remains negative in both the S equation and the B equation, it is only
statistically different from zero in the B equation. Thus, our first hypothe-
sis is contradicted by the multilevel model for total earnings: economic
growth is not positively related to the returns to education; instead, the
relationship is negative. Furthermore, our decomposition results show
that the negative impact of economic growth on the return to schooling
works mainly through bonuses and subsidies. Not only does the bonus
share not increase with education, it actually decreases with education
in faster-growing cities.

Consistent with earlier results assuming regional homogeneity, work ex-
perience has a generally positive but concave effect on logged earnings.
What is particularly interesting, however, is that the linear part of the expe-
rience effect is associated with economic growth in the same way as the
education effect: \, is estimated to be negative. In developing hypotheses
earlier, we were not sure how to predict the relationship between the experi-
ence effect and economic growth. With the results reported in the first col-
umn of table 4, we are inclined to group education and experience together
under a broad category of human capital. In the human capital framework,
education and experience are the two most important dimensions of human
capital, respectively representing formal and informal training (Mincer
1974). However, the similarity between experience and education is limited
to the model for total earnings. Unlike the case of education, the interaction
effect between experience and economic growth (),) is significantly nega-
tive (— 0.005) for the regular salary/wage education but insignificant for the
bonus share equation. That is, work experience is a less important factor
for determining a regular salary or wage in faster-growing cities than in
slower-growing cities. This negative relationship suggests that govern-
ment-sponsored seniority systems for setting salary and wage scales have
been weakened in faster-growing cities.

We also observe from table 4 that the effects of party membership and
gender on total earnings are unrelated to economic growth. For party
membership, the absence of an effect holds true after decomposition. For
G= [se > ly: wl] Jems (8)

i=1 j=l

where »., = E(y), and i and j refer to any two data points in the popula-
tion. The Gini index is bounded between zero, which indicates absolute
equality, and one, which indicates absolute inequality. For properties of
the Gini index, the reader is referred to other sources (e.g., Allison 1978;
Lerman and Yitzhaki 1984). Note that the definition of Gini presumes
population data. In many research settings, including this one, we have
access only to sample data. There are two solutions to this problem. The
first solution is to ignore the difference between a population and a sam-
ple and apply the population formula to sample data. We call this solu-
tion “sample analog” (SA) estimation. For convenience, we follow the
advice of Lerman and Yitzhaki (1984) in calculating SA estimates of G:

G, = 2 covly, F(y)\/9, (9)

where F(y) is the empirical cumulative distribution of y after y is rank
ordered, and ¥ is the sample mean of y. The second solution is to assume
a parametric distribution underlying the dependent variable and derive
a maximum-likelihood estimator. Our maximum-likelihood estimator is
based on the assumption that the dependent measure y follows a lognor-
mal distribution, as this assumption greatly simplifies Gini to a monotonic
transformation of the standard deviation of logged y (Allison 1978, p. 874):

Gy = 2®[Siog¢)/(2"?)] — 1, (10)

where S}9,(,) is the standard deviation of log(y), and ®(-) is the cumulative
distribution function for a standard normal variable.

For each city, we calculate G, and G,, according to equations (9) and
(10) and list them in appendix table Al. With few exceptions, G, and G,,
vary between 0.17 and 0.28. For the whole data set, G, = 0.230 and G,,
= 0.240. By international standards, these figures are very low (Psachar-
opoulos 1981; Executive Yuan 1990, p. 19). However, we are not so
much interested in the levels of Gini as in the variation of Gini across
different cities in China. In particular, we want to examine the relation-
ship between Gini or other measures of overall inequality and economic
growth. Before we delve into this exercise, we would like to draw infer-
ences a priori.

One dominant view of economic development and inequality is Kuz-
nets’s (1955) thesis that inequality follows an inverted U shape: inequality
initially rises in the early and intermediate stages of development and then
eventually declines with continued development. Strictly speaking, how-
ever, Kuznets’s thesis is inapplicable to our study because Kuznets was
concerned with total inequality rather than urban inequality. In fact, rural-
to-urban migration is one of the key reasons behind Kuznets’s conjecture
that inequality increases during industrialization. However, Kuznets’s
thesis has been incorporated into a general modernization theory con-
tending that increases in inequality accompany rapid economic growth in
developing countries (Nee 1991, p. 277; Crenshaw and Ameen 1994, p. 2).
While this conjecture is consistent with the experience of some countries
such as Brazil (Fishlow 1972), Taiwan’s recent history has clearly proven
the opposite: Gini coefficients dropped gradually from 0.321 in 1964 to
0.277 in 1980 and then steadily climbed to 0.312 in 1990 (Executive Yuan
1990, p. 15). The example of Taiwan is relevant in three ways. First, while
most studies confirming Kuznets’s thesis are based on cross-sectional data
(Gillis et al. 1987; Nee 1994, p. 7), high-quality trend data are available
for Taiwan. Second, being culturally Chinese, Taiwan provides a natural
reference for comparison with China. Third, Taiwan has had low levels of
inequality comparable to China’s. If Taiwan did not experience a rise in
inequality during its early stages of rapid development during the 1960s
and 1970s, there is reason to believe that inequality can be kept low during
China’s economic reforms.

Note that the two different methods of calculating Gini yield similar
results, as the correlation between G, and G,, is 0.932. Thus, the choice
between the two appears inconsequential. For ease of computation and
interpretation, we will focus our attention on G,,, which is in essence a
monotonic transformation of the standard deviation of log(y). In fact,
the standard deviation or the variance of log(y) can be used as a direct
measure of inequality (Allison 1978). Labor economists (Chiswick 1971;
Fishlow 1972; Lam and Levison 1992) have shown that total inequality
can be decomposed based on the individual-level determinants of earn-
ings. For ease of illustration, let us work with a simple case where there
is no interaction effect between education and gender. That is, we set
6. = 0. For each city we take the variance function on both sides of the
equation and then take the partial derivatives of log Y with respect to

8, and B,:

dV(log Y)/AB, = 2B, V(X) + 2B, cov(X,, X,) + 2B, cov(X,, X3)

+ 2B, cov(X,,X,) + 2B; cov(X,, Xs); (11a)
dV (og Y)/9B, = 2B, V(X,) + 2B, cov(X,, X,) + 2B; cov(X,, X3)

+ 2B,cov(X,, X,) + 2B; cov(X,, Xs). (11b)

We now make another simplifying assumption that the covariances do
not vary across cities so that we can substitute estimates from the entire
sample into the equation.”! As an approximation, we also make use of
our earlier parameter estimates under the assumption of regional homoge-
neity (i.e., model 1 of table 1). Thus, we reduce equation (11) into

dV(log Y)/8B, = —.02799 + 19.4992B,; (12a)
aV(log V)/AB, = —6.0645 + 210.14648,. (12b)

 

That is to say, as long as B, is above a small threshold of 0.0144, which
is generally true for our data, earnings inequality is a positive and increas-
ingly positive function of the rate of return to education. Likewise, as
long as B, is above a small threshold of 0.0289, which is also true,
earnings inequality is a positive and increasingly positive function of the
return to the linear component of work experience.

Hence, we infer that macrolevel factors that increase the rate of returns
to education and work experience also increase overall inequality. At low
rates of return, increases in overall inequality due to increases in returns
to human capital are slow. At high rates of return, however, increases
in overall inequality due to increases in returns to human capital are very
fast, as the relationship between the two is nonlinear and convex. It is
for this reason that we stated that Nee’s market transition theory implies
an increasing trend in overall inequality (see n. 4).

In table 5, we present the correlation matrix for various city-level
indices and regression parameters. As expected, faster economic growth
is correlated with higher mean earnings (correlation = 0.577) and higher
mean logged earnings (correlation = 0.502). Furthermore, the correlation
between economic growth and the mean of our bonus share measure is
much higher (0.522) than that between economic growth and the mean
of logged salary and wages (0.216). Note that the city-level measure of
bonus rate (reported in app. table A1) is highly correlated with the mean
of our measure of the bonus share (0.980), an indication that B captures
intercity variation in the importance of bonuses and subsidies relative to
regular salary and wages.

We note the negative correlation (—.407) between R? from the city-
specific baseline model and economic growth (z). This negative correla-
tion suggests that earnings determination varies less systematically and
conforms less to the human capital model in cities where economic
growth has been faster than in cities where economic growth has been
slower. Much of this negative correlation is due to bonuses and subsidies,
as R? has relatively large negative correlations with the mean of B and
the city-level bonus rate (—0.515 and —0.503, respectively) but a small
positive correlation with logged salary/wage (0.103).

Consistent with results from the multilevel analysis, faster economic
growth is correlated with a lower return to education (correlation =
—0.337) and with a lower return to work experience (correlation =
—0.115).?? Of special interest in table 5 are the correlations between
economic growth and several measures of inequality: economic growth
has low correlations with the SA and ML estimates of the Gini index
(0.287 and 0.236, respectively). These results do not lend strong support
to the modernization view that high inequality is a necessary price to
pay for rapid economic growth. In brief, cities with faster-growing econo-
mies are characterized by higher mean earnings (particularly higher bo-
nuses and subsidies), lower returns to education and experience, less
conformity to the baseline model for earnings determination, and slightly
higher overall inequality.

Given equation (12), these results imply that education and experience
work to depress the overall inequality in faster-growing cities. That is,
the correlation between economic growth and overall inequality would
“2 aqey ‘dde wo aur0s “5
pur -¥ “Ty 219%} “dde ur poyiodai are sayer snuog JaAe-AjD “saye1 snuog Jo uoTeURTdxa ue J0J TY 2I1qQe} “dde 2ag ‘0 = °f = *¢ Jey} JUTENSUOD oy} YATM ‘sarTD Sg ay} JO
yore 104 () “ba Jo sayeumse saxenbs-ysea] ayy 0} Jayar (s,g) sJUatyyza0o uoIsseIZOY “uoReUINse Zojeue-sjdures = YS pue UoreUINse pooyrjayy-uNUXeu = TJ{—'aLON.

 

 

 

OOO'T Shp The BSE OZ SHE" SHI 00Z-  E10"—99T— vET'- LL” TT (7g) aousttadxe Jo “73209
000'T THO" Tsp LOT" 902 E977 — LZ OFO'—  S@z"—  SBTT— BBT— LEE ee (7g) woryeonpe Jo “33209

O00'T 2Is'— 906° 66" 898" TE ZT" COT” SZ hOB ET ttre (4p) TUE penpIsoy,

OOO" —862"—  9EZ"— LOS STS GOT" 067" = THE 090° = LOR rs QD a

O0O'T @€6" —10Z’— SHI HI" ZO — ET’ 620" ~~ (2p) eyeunse ys ‘TurD

OOOT Lez Z8T" 660" S20" BLT OB ~~ (*p) syeumse TW. “TUED

OOO'T 086" STO" LIEN BOLTS reeeerrereernens ng) aye snuog,

OOO'r 1£0' 669° 199" 180" ze" * (q) areys snuog paso] jo vay

OOOT F€L° 824" O20" (g) eBea/Arefes pedo] Jo ueayy

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

000°T 196° 410° zos” creteeees « So]) sBururea pa8Zo] jo ueayy
O00'T 090° LLG) etree (@) sBururea Jo vay
ooorT st'- 7 7" (¢ 30}) ezis uoeindod passo7
000°T veeee srett* (2) YyMorZ IWOOT
‘9 nr) oy 9 “9 ua a s & Bo} « g 30 2

 

 

WNIHD NI SaILID $¢ SSOUDV SOILSILVLS GALVWILSY GNV SAT€VNIVA TVALXELNOD ONOWY SNOILV1aaaOZ

$ ATaVvL
DISCUSSION

To recapitulate, our results are negative: We failed to find higher returns
to education and lower returns to party membership in cities that experi-
enced faster economic growth. Instead, for total earnings the returns to
education as well as to work experience are negatively associated with
economic growth, and the effects of party membership and gender are
regionally invariant. Furthermore, we find the correlation between eco-
nomic growth and overall earnings inequality to be moderate, in part
due to the equalizing influence of the negative relationship between the
returns to human capital factors and economic growth.

These new results contradict expectations derived from the literature
and thus present an interesting empirical puzzle. Very often, it is new
empirical findings that serve as the ultimate arbitrator of theoretical dis-
putes and set the course for future theoretical work. Although our pri-
mary interest in this paper is to report surprising empirical results, we
would like to offer our interpretation in this section.

While data quality can always be suspect, we believe that it is an unlikely
source for the negative findings.”* Compared to data used in similar studies
on earnings inequality in China, CHIP is superior for two reasons. First,
CHIP is a large national sample; in contrast, most earlier studies (with the
few exceptions of Khan et al. 1992; Griffin and Zhao 1993; Nee 1994, 1996)
are based on regional samples. Second, CHIP used an unusually detailed
survey instrument to collect information pertaining to earnings, including
all forms of subsidies (see Griffin and Zhao 1993). In addition, our results
are robust in the sense that our qualitative conclusions do not depend on
our multilevel model. As shown in table 5, the returns to education and
experience estimated via OLS separately for each city (with B, and B, set
to zero) are negatively correlated with the measure of economic growth.
Although we concede the possibility that economic growth may have been
measured with error, there is no reason to believe that measurement errors
are so systematic as to bias our results. We have confirmed the validity of
our measure of economic growth both by a city-by-city check for face valid-
ity and by its high correlation with mean earnings (table 5). One likely
source of measurement error for economic growth is possible changes in
geographic boundaries between 1985 and 1988 (see n. 18). Such changes
should favor smaller cities, which have expanded more rapidly in recent
years. That is, it is possible that our measure of economic growth for small
cities is inflated due to the problem of boundary reclassification between
1985 and 1988. Table 5 shows, however, that the logarithm of population
size in 1988 has only a weak negative correlation with the measure of eco-
nomic growth (—0.151). We should not attribute all of this correlation to
boundary reclassification, since we know that smaller cities have actually
experienced faster rates of real growth since the onset of the reforms. In
any event, it is safe to conclude that this correlation is too small for city size
or measurement errors associated with city size to explain away the role of
economic growth.

One likely explanation for the negative findings is that Nee’s market
transition theory and Chiswick’s economic reasoning may be applicable
to rural China but inapplicable to urban China. As observed by Réna-
Tas (1994, p. 44), Nee’s support for market transition theory has so far
been restricted to data from rural China; whether conclusions drawn
from studies of rural workers can be generalized to urban workers re-
mains an open question. Vast differences exist between the urban and
rural sectors of China, in large part because the two sectors have been
governed by distinct administrative policies with tight restriction on ru-
ral-to-urban migration. The scholarship on contemporary China has
nearly always made a sharp distinction between the rural and urban
sectors, treating them as separate entities. In a recent study of wages
that combines the two, Peng (1992) finds that the Chinese wage sys-
tem is characterized far more by the rural-urban distinction than by the
public-private distinction, as wage determination in the rural public sec-
tor is similar to that in the rural private sector but quite different from
that in the urban state sector. One prominent rural-urban difference is
that, prior to economic reforms, Chinese agriculture was collectivized
into communes but was never nationalized, whereas the state owned
virtually all of the important enterprises in urban China. Indeed, one
may make a case that industrial reforms in China are more partial—that
is, farther away from the ideal of “markets”—than agricultural reforms.

It seems plausible that our negative findings can be attributed to “par-
tial reforms” in urban China, as the transition to markets is far from
complete. This argument, however, is untenable for three reasons. First,
as Roéna-Tas (1994, p. 44) argues, it is too easy to attribute negative
findings to “partial reforms” and thus to make market transition theory
unfalsifiable. Second, if the negative findings are indeed attributable to
partial reforms in urban China, we are interested in knowing how partial
reforms have brought about a regional variation in earnings determina-
tion that contradicts our theoretical expectations. Third, Nee (in this
issue) reports that for rural China the effect of education on income is
significantly positive for inland provinces but nil or negative for coastal
provinces, a finding that he found unexpected (p. 940) but that is consis-
tent with our results.

We attribute our negative findings to the lack of a true labor market
in 1988 urban China. Restated, the relationship between employers and
employees remains essentially in the old socialist order, although eco-
nomic reforms have generated new manifestations of this relationship.
As pointed out by Lin and Bian (1991, p. 661) in a study of status
attainment in urban China, “status attainment in China is more geared
to work units than to occupations per se.” That is to say, where one
works matters a great deal and probably more than what tasks one per-
forms in the workplace. Similar to occupation in western societies, one’s
work unit affiliation in China reveals much about one’s social status.
Before economic reforms, inequalities generated by work units were
mainly manifested in terms of housing, access to facilities (such as bath-
houses and childcare centers), the ability to confer or seek favors (guan-xi
or “connections”), and other fringe benefits. Since the reforms, however,
the benefits that workers derive from work units have become more
monetary. Walder’s (1986, 1987, 1992a, 1992b) work has clearly demon-
strated that work organizations commonly engage in handing out mone-
tary benefits to their workers, sometimes over the upper limits set by
the government. When work organizations have more resources at their
disposal, these resources are directly translated into financial benefits to
workers in the form of bonuses and subsidies, regardless of workers’
actual contributions. That is to say, intraorganizational inequality is kept
low while interorganizational inequality may have risen, primarily
through the distribution of bonuses and subsidies.

Let us illustrate the situation with a hypothetical example. Say two
incumbents (“a” and “b”) of the same occupation have identical quali-
fications and are thus substitutable for each other. The actual amount
they are paid may vary greatly depending on the abilities of their work
units (A and B, respectively) to afford bonuses and subsidies. It is possible
that organization A pays worker a 1,000 yuan (about 53% of average
urban earnings in 1988) more than organization B pays worker b simply
because A has more money at its disposal than does B. In fact, A pays
all of its workers about 1,000 yuan above the level B pays its workers.
Because there is no labor market in urban China, workers working for
organization B cannot quit to move to organization A in order to get
higher pay; neither can organization A replace its workers with those
working for B in order to lower its labor costs. In fact, as shown later,
organization A has no incentives to lower its labor costs. Hence, pay
inequities across work organizations will not disappear or even approach
equilibrium. Although greatly simplified, this scenario captures much of
the reality described by recent scholarship, particularly Walder’s, on
social inequalities and work organizations.

How do we account for organization A’s seemingly irrational practice
of paying its workers more than “necessary” in the form of bonuses
and subsidies and thus foregoing higher profits? Walder (1992a, p. 526)
persuasively eliminates as an explanation the need to use incentives for
retaining skilled workers, as the labor market is essentially nonexistent
and job mobility is extremely low in urban China (Walder 1986; Davis
1992). There are two explanations, one economic and the other sociologi-
cal. The economic explanation is based on the fact that socialist econo-
mies typically operate under what Kornai (1986, 1989) characterizes as
a “soft budget” due to vague definitions of property rights. As Kornai’s
work demonstrates, under a soft budget, it is quite rational for work
organizations to spend as much as possible since they are constantly
bargaining to obtain or protect economic resources from the central gov-
ernment. Rewarding workers with extra pay or other tangible benefits
increases the cost of production and thus reduces the amount of profit
being sucked away into the government’s vast redistributive channel.

The sociological explanation argues that social structures in socialist
societies are tightly organized around work organizations (Walder 1986).
In socialist economies, employment is not a market relationship in terms
of payment for labor or services performed. Rather, “employment plays
a welfare role,” with work organizations being responsible for the overall
well-being of their employees (Walder 1986, p. 11). Although the govern-
ment has attempted to change this employer-employee relationship in
recent years (e.g., housing has been commercialized in limited areas), the
norm of employer paternalism is so entrenched in Chinese society that
the attempt has not been successful. In fact, workers’ dependency on
work organizations has not decreased but increased, since bonuses and
subsidies, which are set by the work units, have constituted an increas-
ingly large fraction of earnings over the years (Walder 19926). In our
CHIP data, we have found bonuses and subsidies to comprise higher
proportions of total employment earnings in faster-growing cities than in
slower-growing cities.

Although all work organizations have an incentive to “overpay” their
workers, not all of them are in a position to do so. As a consequence of
economic reforms, organizations are allowed to reward their workers only
when they can find the financial resources needed for doing so. However,
this pay inequality generated by work organizations appears to critics as
“irrational” or “unfair” because profit differences between organizations
can be arbitrary. A Chinese observer (Zhao 1994, p. 113) points out that
profit levels are affected by many “external conditions” above and beyond
workers’ productivity. Such external conditions include the dual-pricing
system, domestic and international markets, administrative mismanage-
ment, and the government’s financial policies toward certain districts, cer-
tain industries, and certain enterprises. From this, Zhao concludes, “Ex-
cessive earnings inequalities across districts, industries, and work units
attributable not to differences in worker productivity but to these [external]
factors have generated the masses’ discontent. On the surface, this discon-
tent reflects the unfairness of distribution; in actuality it reflects the un-
fairness of process. From this, we think that the government . . . should
provide all workers an equal opportunity for fair competition” (p. 113, our
translation from Chinese). By “the unfairness of process” Zhao means that
the affiliation with highly profitable enterprises, which is the major deter-
minant of earnings, is determined mainly through administrative channels
and not through market forces.

If interorganizational inequalities are largely due to external factors that
are related to economic disequilibrium, intraorganizational inequalities
can be even more arbitrary. Walder (1987, 19926) and Shirk (1989) both
show that workers prefer equal distribution of pay and reject any notion of
linking pay and productivity within organizations. Let us recall that earn-
ings in 1988 urban China essentially consist of two parts roughly equal in
importance: (a) regular salary or wages and (b) bonuses and subsidies.
While the first part is set by the government and varies little, the second
part is set by individual work units. Note that the returns to education and
experience are explicitly recognized in the government’s pay schedule.
Walder’s and Shirk’s work suggests that human capital factors do not mat-
ter much in the determination of bonuses and subsidies within an organiza-
tion. If this is the case, the more capable organizations are of giving mone-
tary benefits to workers, the higher the intercept of the earnings equation
but the flatter the slopes of human capital factors.”> Large geographic varia-
tions in economic growth and thus financial capability explain why the re-
turns to education and experience are lower and average earnings are
higher in cities where economic growth has been faster.

Direct evidence has yet to be collected that would show workers’ high
dependency on the financial conditions of their work units for bonuses
TABLE 6

SIGNIFICANCE OF VARIOUS FACTORS IN DETERMINING REGULAR SALARY AND BONUS
SHARE: RESULTS FROM AN ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE

 

 

SALary (S) Bonus SHARE (B)
SouRCE df SS MS SS MS

 

By explanatory variable:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

City ....... 54 142.258 2.634 251.588 4.659
Education 7 43.905 6.272 778 ALL
Experience . 45 429.793 9.551 29.213 .649
Party member . 1 5.402 5.402 -093 093
Gender 1 9.145 9.145 +129 129
Gender-education interaction 7 5.379.768 -810  .116
Employer ownership .......... 8 20.301 2.538 4.199.525
Occupation 7 7.776 1.111 -810 .116
Industry .. 16 11.200 = .700 5.989.374
Employment term . 4 4.750 1.188 7.279 1.820

Model ...............645 150 1,124.339 7.496 326.907 2.179

 

 

Error .... 15,437 904.494 .059 927.312  .060
15,587 2,028.833 1,254,219
55.42 26.06

 

 

Note.—WN = 15,588. All explanatory variables are entered into the analysis of variance as categorical
variables. df stands for degrees of freedom, SS sum of squares, and MS mean of squares (MS = SS/
df). For explanatory variables, SS refers to the partial sum of squares with other variables controlled
for. Missing values are coded into a separate category for employer ownership, occupation, industry,
and employment term.
rion, which adjusts for degrees of freedom. For the logged regular salary/
wage (S), city is the sixth most important factor after (in order of impor-
tance) experience, gender, education, party membership, and employer
ownership. For the bonus share (B), city is by far the most important
factor: a 4.659 mean of squares is attributable to intercity differences,
with the next highest mean of squares being 1.820 (for employment term).
Similar to results shown in table 2, the bonus share is less “explainable”
than regular salary/wage. For the B model, R? is 26.06%; R? is 55.42%
for the S model. To the limited extent that it is explainable, the bonus
share is mostly determined by geography: at least 77.0% of the small R?
for the B model is attributable to intercity variation.”” For S, the compa-
rable figure is merely 12.7%.

These ANOVA results in table 6 are consistent with our interpretation
that bonuses and subsidies are distributed to workers mainly for their
affiliations with profitable work units. The share of bonuses and subsidies
among total employment earnings does not reward human capital factors
because bonuses and subsidies are regulated neither by the old socialist
regime nor by a market regime. In the socialist regime, salary is set
administratively as an increasing function of education and experience; in
the market regime often regarded as the ultimate destination of Chinese
economic reforms, employers would need to raise bids in order to compete
for productive workers. Given the absence of true labor markets in 1988
urban China, moderate returns to human capital factors for the regular
salary or wage suggest that salaries and wages are governed by the old
socialist regime. In contrast, bonuses and subsidies are largely unregu-
lated according to any clearly articulated logical system.
reforms is also unsupported, as we find the return to party membership
to be invariant.”* Our results are consistent with Réna-Tas’s (1994) recent
work, which clearly demonstrates the importance of political capital for
maintaining an advantaged position during Hungary’s transition to a
market economy. In addition, our results show that the gender gap in
total earnings is also unrelated to the pace of economic growth. The level
of overall earnings inequality remains low in China and only slightly
correlated with economic growth, in part because the tendency toward
higher levels of inequality in faster-growing cities is offset by the lower
returns to human capital variables in these cities.

Given the high quality of the data and the appropriateness of the
statistical strategies used, we conclude that our negative results serve to
reject the applicability of Nee’s market transition theory, at least to urban
China in 1988. Although one cannot really rule out the possibility that
market transition theory will become more applicable with time, we do
not resort to “partial reforms” as the default explanation, as it is tauto-
logical and unfalsifiable. Rather, we find our results to be congruent with
economic and sociological explanations that give primary attention to
institutions as agents of stratification in socialist and reforming-socialist
economies.

In conclusion, we find that in terms of earnings determination, reform-
era urban China cannot be simply characterized as falling along a contin-
uum between a redistributive economy and a market or capitalist econ-
omy. Instead, we argue that the postreform Chinese economy has
qualitatively unique features and should be studied accordingly. One
unique feature is that, while there are free or semifree markets for goods
and services, labor markets are virtually absent. A related feature is the
vagueness in defining property rights and articulating the rules for profit
sharing for nominally public enterprises. Given the continued acceptance
of the ethos that work organizations should provide welfare to workers,
profitability differentials are translated into large differentials in bonuses
and subsidies across work organizations and thus regions. Variations in
bonuses and subsidies cannot be adequately explained by a traditional
human capital model. Ironically, the extra earnings in the form of bo-
nuses and subsidies that epitomize economic reforms are even less subject
to market forces than are regular salaries and wages. We view this irony
as an unintended consequence of economic reforms in urban China,
which until now have failed to effectively address the fundamental issues
of property rights and labor markets.
v6 le or oll Luv ore" BPEL 1z¢ Te9'T Tle corres nogzurt
6°01 Te eb" 191" 191" 862° 8er'l 819 084‘T zs oo" Zuopued
oz ve Ly 7st" ost” 6Lz° OS's sss 188° €19 . vreerrsrersersees UBT CT
e1l 7 st elt zur" L0¢" srl z+9 ST8‘T 619 vrreeereerssesreseseececes BupkUaYS
:Zurwoery
6°02 Ls" or Tez" Tre" eer" 90¢"L 88 zh9'T 6L1 coer: Supsyun x
T0¢ 6L er zs7" TSz" es 9ee'L 408 669'T 861  Susyourf
$8T 1s" Ir" 961" Lez" oer £674 z8$ L8s‘T 002 Srrrerereersrereeresesesrees yz Suey
$9 or le 092° 6b" rr 662°L spel ZL9'T L0z coe uenbsue x
86 gz or 612 ver zr sIeL 878 spoT gee vrreeerreeeseees, Buoyed
16 9e° am 187" $92" Lie vSeL 102'2 oes‘T ze ~ uendrey
Txueys
8 oe" or" 961" 91z" 88" LOS", StL 796° sig creeeteees vo Burfieg
surfiog
sb ez" Ore Ter" oes LL0'T 1L8‘T 298°ST TeI0L
(%) avey z ey 2 5 as weal as ueayy N
jenuuy snuog
xe@puy tury) s8ururegq pessory

 

YMorN swWOUDd Ty

sSuruieq jenuuy

 

SOO 88-s86T

VIV( OXOTA dIHD 8861

 

 

ALID GNV FONIAONY Ad SHOLVOIGN] OLWONOOY GNV ALITWNOANT SONINUVY JO SdANSVaY AUVNINAS

IV ATaVL
6'eT oe Ir gor" est" 8ze vOe'L S8b e9s‘T sot vores Suedueny
6-02 Ls" 6g" 161" zoz" z9¢° €L2'L 98¢ Les't ver ~ uerpeunyz
v2 09° Le zz" ez" sir Leek 8s ozs‘t 692 o Suerxury’
Ver Le ee vez $97" Lb sore 199 ert s8z srrrrereressrerecsrrsesesesesees BUBAUYT
9°91 or ve 102" 102° ze" 9rz"L 09¢ oos‘T zt - cores upyssuIpsuld,
vst eb" La re Ze Leb 2L7'L 26$ 99s‘t z9¢ “+ BuesonT
Lg sz" oe" 6Lt oT" ore" stl ely e6e'T vor ceerreeess Suge yy
TOr 62" se" O6r" 961" ose’ been 8e9 e19'T vse ceretteeeececensnsnes noyzsueyZ
sweuox,
set se" or ata Tez" 9Ir 9824 889 8s‘T $8 coe puny,
wl sr or" 972° oe" ey £86°9 ors LUT 16 cireeseeeeeneens + Buedng
a se or ior: Bez" sop" coe ozs"t s08't pee cette SuTbUY
el ze er" gsz" ele" vor" roel 186 LL9'T LLe cerpteeeneceees oo ueurenyy
vat se" sr Lez" Sz" zsh T9e"L SL oeL‘T 981 vere " nqsueg
Vet le eh 6Lt vor" Bre 18¢"L 882 21L'T eLt - . nyo
wLI 8b" sh 161" 72" Tor" 906"2 £86 984'T 606 ” seers TOE
“mnyuy
sre 68° sb 112" 02" soe" Ozr'L 9r6'T ers‘T 062 “ noyzsue A,
6°02 Ls sb vor" Lou" yse" €2b'L 92s SOL‘T 06 crrpreesesoesersesesoeseseeees ZUQU OU A
$02 9s" or" 602° 102° zLe" 680° ble 782'T LOL sereseeweceeseseovoseseeeeseeee ULATENET
6°81 zs Lr 291" Ist" +e 9Is'L 9¢9 Te6‘T Or cerrttenseees “+ SuojueN,
1st os" Ly 9st" 002° ose" SLL €2L 818'T 9LT “ noyzsueyD
o'zr +e or" ost 6st" 6c" ose'L oss 269'T ore “ noyznx
Lor os or cor" 91" vie S8b'L ess s98‘T bb . verre TXT
vst er or 191" bl zie" Ors ozs oeu‘T ves ve Surfuen,
ms3ueif
(%) ey z aey a “9 as ueay, as ua N
jenuuy snuog
xapuy tury sSuluzeq padZo-y (ueng)

 

WyMory) MwWou0TT

s8urwreg jenuuy

 

SOD 88-$86T

VLVQ OMI dIHO 886T

 

(panuruod) 1¥ ATAVL
“Y}MOIZ Jo ayer pezifenuue our z s}19AU0d

Ayer TENUUR,, Payfaqe] UUNJod ye] ayy pue “(*TAGD/*"'TAqd)30] = 2 (EAdH) ANsnpur Jo anpea yonposd ssoaB Aq painseoul st yjMorB IOUOIy “sarpisqns/sasnuoq

ysed adeiaav ay} sajouep

24 pue oBem/Areyes 1epnBai aBesaae ay} sajouap ‘4 oxy “(24 + '4)/2q se (@Bem/Arepes aatjtsod YIM syuspuodsar asoy} 103) peuyap st ayer

snuog “A1fenbaur Jo xepur TUIH ay} 10y sayeuITse Zopeue-ojdures pue pooyrpsyy]-wnuxe ay} Jouap ‘Ajaanoadsar “5 pue “y pue ‘azis ejdures ay} sajousp A/—"SLON.

 

OL

v6

oeT
evr
$2
oO?
69

fir

Toe
vip
v87
ase
se
aly
Ost
OFT

87
Ter
OFT
sor
86

ce

La
6
or"
19°
ve
07°
we

6L
vO'T
sl
16°
16°
Ort
ey
Tr"

sl
Le
Ww
oe"
82°

se"

er"
cy
Le
vs
8b

os”

8s"
9S"
8s"
89°
7s
Ly
es
es”

vy
se"
by
sv
Iv

TSsz

Ost’
err”
902°
€2z"
zor”
sez"
lt

bre
S@z
OLz°
Bez"
ere
961"
6€7°
Os2"

ser”
oot”
6ST"
991°
vl

Sle

vst”
est”
O22"
e@z"
Olt’
OfZ"
cor”

982°
cst
$67
sez"
see”
827°
408°
zse"

Ost”
991°
691"
002"
zor”

Lov"

Sle
ele"
v6e"
00r"
vor"
viv
ere”

sts”
vs
ges”
ety
419°
OTr”
sss
sy

892°
962°
zoe"
sse"
ere:

60b°2

60r°L
Tors
Ter.
88s".
6982
cp
8Ss"L

Z6S°L
Ssovk
LOS
S66°L
Lev
LE78
LoL
OTL.

Loy
OLe£
66r'L
Orbs
6Ir'L

982'T

28b
bsp
Or0'T
826
Ts
ore'T
£69

ost‘T
L10'T
ont
920‘
SIS‘T
Tes‘T
0L6

SbLiT

Ley
vss
86S
Les
0z9

s98‘T

eTL'T
008‘T
vest
Zvr'z
£202
£e8‘T
$20°7

6272
gte‘z
£222
egz‘e
9¢0'
990'r
920'Z
90s‘z

eLL'T
099'T
688'T
86L'T
29L'T

960‘T

T6T
vst
26
98T
08

TST
Sis

107
022
961
60¢
16

907
68T
Lss

261
LOZ
v6
961
es9

 

* noyzuey
msuey
so upysoeg
rd
see ntfagy
veer en,
~ Burne
sees uenypsuoq,
Votes SuTTUNY
cueuun x
"+ Surboeyz,
“ noyziny,
 Suerfueyz,
sores upysog
“ noyueys
“* uayzuays
* wensoeys
sees poyzsueng
:Suop3ueny
uesorry
“ Tyseys
” uediyg
 TysBuenyL
vo uegNA,
eqn
6LT” ore asp 060° seo" — sot" 29"'7— T¢0° 610° 299°9 ixuny,
11z ole” Sz 120° 62h — 111" 11zz- 120° £10" 649°9 7 Bueéng
vez zor" 8°97 120" 18z°— seo" 046°9— 640" ZO" gss‘9 * Surbuy
8Iz° 16¢" ese 190° Ore’ — 390° 6b8'b— 9¢0° sto" 148°9 “ ueurenyy
96T° zse" ep oto" slz-— oto’ — 660° — vS0° +0" veg 7 nqsueg
491" 867° v6z 200° £10°- 920° 161"b— seo" 620° 119°9 sees TUT,
zr" gee Ore 600° ser — 690° 809° — 8£0" 9¢0° 96b'°9 "0" PRH
amyuy
bl ore £°67 810° o8z°— 10" ers e— 70° 810° TZgg rs noyzsue A
ist 182° ZIP oto 661 — 101" seo"s— T¥0" S10" 692°9 : ~ Buayoue x
61 oze" T0¢ 10° 0zz"- LOI" 6IrL— 90" 9¢0° eTe'9 sees ULATeny
Orr” 992° ve 810° soe’ — SIT’ ble p— Tg0° 00° OOr'Z ~ Suojuen
69T° zoe" vie $zo" 96e° — Ts0" zerL— so" £00" 696°9 “ noyzaueyD
evr" pst" Ley 80° Lgg-— 160° 106°9— v0" +10" 6L°9 “ noyznx
eT 8b" 9°8¢ 00" 0L0°— 490° vsoe— +£0° 620° 91L°9 vores ORM
921° $77" vsP £10" Le — $60° ore L— L~0" L10° 889°9 a ONG
ms3ueif{
Ter" eez" €or 20° Zug — zor" OL b— Lg0° £20" £799 *  noyzurt
OT: 62 se 900° — 000° £0" zezt— 120° 80° L41L9 * vo Buopued:
921° $77 ose £10° 161 — 6s0° Le peo" 610° £s88°9 vores UpTTed
Opt” osz° ere S10" oz" — L410" el b— ££0° 20° Lylg corres Bue cuayg
:Buluoery
oz LLe" 6°92 zr0" vos — o¢0" Ove’ s— +0" 800° 169°9 verrrrees Bugysun A
TOT ere Sr 410° 060°T — 17 @7-@1— 190° 800° — 0989 rrrrererererereess Buayutt
Sor’ ore ose 8s0° eu - oro" sseL— 9S0° 610° Orb Q “7 Tyzsuey)
ata T8¢" Toe eo" ele — 060° — 1S9°6— 090° 9¢0" 6re'9 * uenbsue x
est 8ze" L°0b 090° £68" — $10" ose6 — +S0° oto" 8bL°9 verre Buoyed
102° ole” S-Ob z£0" Oz — $77" 8618 — TSO" £20" 19¢°9 veers WenATe TL,
crxueys
ost 6ze" 1°82 $00" ost — £0" ssro— £0" 810° segsq cu - cree SuTftog,
:Burlleg
asWa (%) oo 9 sg ‘9 (,-01 x) *d ‘g °g

 

 

 

 

ALIQ (NV FONIAON AT

TAGOW TWLIdVD NVWAY GaIGOW AHL AO SALVIWILSY

eV ATaVL
“ASIN Uo paseq
XOPUT TUT) OY} JO ayeuNT|se Pooyrayl]-wNuTXeuL ay} 10} “H pue ‘10112 parenbs uvaul jOOI Joy spurys |SWY *(1) “be Jo sayeuutysa sarenbs jsea] Areurpio are sg [[y¥—"aLON.

 

 
 

       

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

  

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

e12" ze" er 660" 649° — zt $rl8— 980° z€0" €1h'9 vemos NOUZURT
msuex)
ag 96T" vos $00° — $s0"— 600° SLLS— 10° £0" gisg oo ueysoRg,
620" o¢z" zTE £00" 8st" — €s0" vez — €20° 920" 906°9 * cos qe
sor" $62" 6'Sb O10" Lee" — S10" SLL'6— 790° TPO" oze'9 ~ nifen
soz" Loe" Sst 120° Lee — zt os.'z— €z0° — €00°— L2e'L vee TTA
Let" £pz 80r 620° T4g°- 160° 800° — T10° $20" 62ZT°L vos Burlnd
Lu Lie" o'er +20" ble — Sut" 826°¢— 960° 00" beso oo wenyasuog,
cor" 062" voz 400° — oro" 090° 680°4— 9r0" hE" 6199 coe Burrus
sweuunyz
ore" bbb" 6°82 810° oe" = 200° — OL 6— 680° £0" 1£9'9 “+ Burboeyz,
112" 68¢" 1°87 600° LIZ" - est" 060° — veo" 980" ss8'9 vores noyziny
992" ost 12 00" — 6L0°— $80" $996 — 090" $20" psyg rrr Sowruey 7,
072" poe S'¢r 020° ose’ — Tel" 08'T — L10" 200° 28k res UB YsOT
80¢" 19s" Lt vor — L00'T veo" L2t— $90" —Lb0" BOZQ * noqueys
161" ze" ve 10° 92@7" — 040° 66°91 — 780° $20" sor, os uayzueys
897" sr 122 ogo" orb’ — 6st” e"pT — 820° 220° s6r'9  uensoeys
vez" 12h Lr 020" see — zer 2£0'p— 620° O10" TL2'L verre noyzguenyy
ssuopsueny
zr" 827" £0¢ 100° — Oro" — 720" — £6¢°9— yr" 220" 219°9 uezorrx
11 zsz" 8°62 soo" Lg0°— zb0° Le6°%— 820" LTO" 1829  Tyseys
TST’ Lz" +t 810° LIZ" - +80" 902°r— z€0° 90" 198'°9 * verre UBATIS
Lev 292" Z'8b 9¢0° zor’ — ozo" 68 IT — 140° 7T0" SObQ Crees TUssuen A
7st ZLe" o'se 910° bz" — 210° S61'9— 70" 0£0" 9rs'9 ue re oRg nA,
speqny
Srr" $92" sse 200° sol — sso" T8¢"¢— ogo’ 00" 66899 rere Sueduen,
gor" 162° T9¢ L10° oze"— 260° es8°s— 4v0" 20° QOS'Q ureter reteeeess uerpeumnyz,
sor" ore" o1e 820° z9¢°— Orr vOr's— Tho 610" L8pg cores SURIXUTX
112" Sle" 0'6e 600° 692° — $20" 6LS°8— 9s0" £20" 22g rns BuesUy
691" zoe" T9¢ 20" Tey = ZL0" 206'2 — 420° €10" $94'9 corres ueussUIpsuld,
6st" see" ZIP 20" £9" — ssl TOIT — $90° 120" Treg cs “ guesonT
vor £62" €°82 100° — sto" — vor" Sbe'p— eco’ T£0" Thro vreerersecereeee Suge yy
gst zz" 6st 120° eer — Orr’ 60°72 — 120” LTO" srsg oo noyzsuayZ

sueuayy
Adelman, Irma, and David Sunding. 1987. “Economic Policy and Income Distribu-
tion in China.” Journal of Comparative Economics 11:444-61.

Aguignier, P. 1988. “Regional Disparities since 1978.” Pp. 93-106 in Transforming
China’s Economy in the Eighties. Vol. 2: Management, Industry and the Urban
Economy, edited by Stephan Feuchtwang, Athar Hussain, and Thierry Pairault.
Boulder, Colo.: Westview.

Allison, Paul D. 1978. “Measures of Inequality.” American Sociological Review 43:
865-80.

Bianchi, Suzanne, and Daphne Spain. 1986. American Women in Transition. New
York: Russell Sage.

Byron, Raymond P., and Evelyn Q. Manaloto. 1990. “Returns to Education in
China.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 38:783—96.

Chiswick, Barry. 1971. “Earnings Inequality and Economic Development.” Quar-
terly Journal of Economics 85:21-39.

Crenshaw, Edward, and Ansari Ameen. 1994. “The Distribution of Income across
National Populations: Testing Multiple Paradigms.” Social Science Research
23:1-22.

Davis, Deborah. 1992. “Job Mobility in Post-Mao Cities: Increases on the Margins.”
China Quarterly 132:1062-85.

DiPrete, Thomas A., and David B. Grusky. 1990. “Structure and Trend in the
Process of Stratification for American Men and Women.” American Journal of
Sociology 96:107—43.

Eichen, Marc, and Ming Zhang. 1993. “Annex: The 1988 Household Sample Sur-
vey—Data Description and Availability.” Pp. 331-46 in The Distribution of
Income in China, edited by Keith Griffin and Renwei Zhao. New York: St.
Martin’s.

Executive Yuan. 1990. Report on the Survey of Personal Income Distribution in
Taiwan Area of the Republic of China. Taipei: Directorate-General of Budget,
Accounting, and Statistics.

Falkenheim, Victor. 1988. “The Political Economy of Regional Reform: An Over-
view.” Pp. 285-309 in Chinese Economic Policy: Economic Reform at Midstream,
edited by Bruce Reynolds. New York: Paragon House.

Firebaugh, Glenn, and Frank D, Beck. 1994. “Does Economic Growth Benefit the
Masses? Growth, Dependence, and Welfare in the Third World.” American Socio-
logical Review 59:631-53.

Fishlow, Albert. 1972. “On the Emerging Problems of Development Policy: Brazilian
Size Distribution of Income.” American Economic Review 62:391—410.

Gelb, Alan. 1990. “TVP Workers’ Incomes, Incentives, and Attitudes.” Pp. 280-98
in China’s Rural Industry: Structure, Development, and Reform, edited by William
A. Byrd and Lin Qingsong. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Gillis, Malcolm, Dwight H. Perkins, Michael Roemer, and Donald R. Snodgrass.
1987. Economics of Development. New York: Norton.

Goldstein, H. 1986. “Multilevel Mixed Linear Model Analysis Using Iterative Gener-
alized Least Squares.” Biometrika 73:43-56.

Griffin, Keith, and Renwei Zhao, eds. 1993. The Distribution of Income in China.
New York: St. Martin’s.

Hannum, Emily, and ‘Yu Xie. 1994. “Trends in Educational Gender Inequality in
China: 1949-1985.” Research in Social Stratification and Mobility 13:73-98.

Hox, Joop J., and Ita G. Kreft. 1994. “Multilevel Analysis Methods.” Sociological
Methods and Research 22:283—99.

Hsiung, Bingyuang, and Louis Putterman. 1989. “Pre- and Post-Reform Income
Distribution in a Chinese Commune: The Case of Dahe Township in Hebei Prov-
ince.” Journal of Comparative Economics 13:406—45.

Khan, Azizur Rahman, Keith Griffin, Carl Riskin, and Renwei Zhao. 1992. “House-
hold Income and Its Distribution in China.” China Quarterly 132:1029-61.

Knight, John, and Lina Song. 1993. “Why Urban Wages Differ in China.” Pp.
216-84 in The Distribution of Income in China, edited by Keith Griffin and Renwei
Zhao. New York: St. Martin’s.

Kornai, Janos. 1986. Contradictions and Dilemmas: Studies on the Socialist Economy
and Society. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

. 1989. “The Hungarian Reform Process: Visions, Hopes, and Reality.” Pp.
32-94 in Remaking the Economic Institutions of Socialism: China and Eastern
Europe, edited by Victor Nee and David Stark with Mark Selden. Stanford, Calif.:
Stanford University Press.

Kuznets, Simon. 1955. “Economic Growth and Income Inequality.” American Eco-
nomic Review 45:1-28.

Lam, David, and Deborah Levison. 1992. “Age, Experience, and Schooling: Decom-
posing Earnings Inequality in the United States and Brazil.” Sociological Inquiry
62:220-45.

Lerman, Robert I., and Shlomo Yitzhaki. 1984. “A Note on the Calculation and
Interpretation of the Gini Index.” Economics Letters 15:363-68.

Li, Ruojian. 1991. “A Preliminary Investigation of the Issue of Increasing Cross-
Regional Differences in Personal Income” (in Chinese, our translation). Shehui
Kexue (Shanghai) 3:41-44.

. 1993. “The Problem of Regional Disparity in Contemporary China’s Social
Development” (in Chinese, our translation). Shehui Kexue Zhanxian (Changchun)
5:114-20.

Lin, Nan, and Yanjie Bian. 1991. “Getting Ahead in Urban China.” American
Journal of Sociology 97:657-88.

Linge, G. J. R., and D. K. Forbes. 1990. “The Space Economy of China.” Pp.
10-34 in China’s Spatial Economy: Recent Developments and Reforms, edited by
G. J. R. Linge and D. K. Forbes. New York: Oxford University Press.

Mason, William M., George Y. Wong, and Barbara Entwisle. 1983. “Contextual
Analysis through the Multilevel Linear Model.” Pp. 72—103 in Sociological Meth-
odology 1983-1984, edited by Samuel Leinhardt. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Mincer, Jacob. 1974. Schooling, Experience and Earnings. New York: Columbia
University Press.

Nee, Victor. 1989. “A Theory of Market Transition: From Redistribution to Markets
in State Socialism.” American Sociological Review 54:663-81.

. 1991. “Social Inequalities in Reforming State Socialism: Between Redistribu-

tion and Markets in China.” American Sociological Review 56:267-82.

. 1994. “Markets and Inequality; Why Marx and Smith Are Both Right.”

Working Paper no. 94.4. Mario Einaudi Center for International Studies, Cornell

University.

. 1996. “The Emergence of a Market Society: Changing Mechanisms of Strati-
fication in China.” American Journal of Sociology, this issue.

Peng, Yusheng. 1992. “Wage Determination in Rural and Urban China: A Compari-
son of Public and Private Industrial Sectors.” American Sociological Review 57:
198-213.

Psacharopoulos, George. 1977. “Schooling, Experience, and Earnings: The Case of
an LDC.” Journal of Development Economics 4:39-48.

. 1981. “Returns to Education: An Updated International Comparison.” Com-
parative Education 17:321-41.

Riskin, Carl. 1987. China’s Political Economy—the Quest for Development since
1949. New York: Oxford University Press.
Rona-Tas, Akos. 1994. “The First Shall Be the Last? Entrepreneurship and Commu-
nist Cadres in the Transition from Socialism.” American Journal of Sociology 100:
40-69.

Selden, Mark. 1993. The Political Economy of Chinese Development. Armonk, N.Y.:
M. E. Sharpe.

Shirk, Susan. 1989. “The Political Economy of Chinese Industrial Reform.” Pp.
328-62 in Remaking the Economic Institutions of Socialism: China and Eastern
Europe, edited by Victor Nee and David Stark with Mark Selden. Stanford, Calif.:
Stanford University Press.

State Statistical Bureau. 1985. China Urban Statistics 1985. London: Longman
Group.

. 1990. China Urban Statistics 1988. New York: Praeger.

. 1993. 1993 Statistical Yearbook of China. Beijing: China Statistical Publish-
ing House.

Szelényi, Ivan. 1978. “Social Inequalities in State Socialist Redistributive Economies:
Dilemmas for Social Policy in Contemporary Socialist Societies of Eastern Europe.”
International Journal of Comparative Sociology 19:63—87.

. 1983. Urban Inequalities under State Socialism. New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.

Trescott, Paul B. 1985. “Incentives versus Equality: What Does China’s Recent
Experience Show?” World Development 13:205-17.

Walder, Andrew G. 1986. Communist Neo-Traditionalism: Work and Authority in
Chinese Industry. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.

. 1987. “Wage Reform and the Web of Factory Interests.” China Quarterly

109:22-41.

. 1990. “Economic Reform and Income Distribution in Tianjin, 1976-1986.”

Pp. 135-56 in Chinese Society on the Eve of Tiananmen, edited by Deborah Davis

and Ezra F. Vogel. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, Council on East

Asian Studies.

. 1992a. “Property Rights and Stratification in Socialist Redistributive Econo-

mies.” American Sociological Review 57:524-39.

. 19926. “Urban Industrial Workers: Some Observations on the 1980s.” Pp.
103-20 in State and Society in China: The Consequences of Reform, edited by
Arthur G. Rosenbaum. Boulder, Colo.: Westview.

Whyte, Martin King. 1986. “Social Trends in China: The Triumph of Inequality.”
Pp. 103-23 in Modernizing China: Post-Mao Reform and Development, edited by
A. Doak Barnett and Ralph N. Clough. Boulder, Colo.: Westview.

Whyte, Martin King, and William L. Parish. 1984. Urban Life in Contemporary
China. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Xie, Yu. 1989. “Measuring Regional Variation in Sex Preference in China: A Caution-
ary Note.” Social Science Research 18:291-305.

Xin, Xin. 1994. “A Synthesis of Perspectives on the Issue of Polarization of Rich
and Poor in China” (in Chinese, our translation). Gansu Lilun Xuekan (Lanzhou)
1:46-50.

Zhao, Renwei. 1990. “Income Distribution.” Pp. 187-99 in The Chinese Economy
and Its Future: Achievements and Problems of Post-Mao Reform, edited by Peter
Nolan and Fureng Dong. Cambridge, Mass.: Polity Press.

Zhao, Zhenyu. 1994. “On Several Issues of Inequality in Social Distribution” (in
Chinese, our translation). Shehui Kexue Zhanxian (Changchun) 1:112-21.

Zhu, Ling. 1991. Rural Reform and Peasant Income in China: The Impact of China’s
Post-Mao Rural Reforms in Selected Regions. Basingstoke: Macmillan.
