Skin Color, Status, and Mate Selection

Author(s): J. Richard Udry, Karl E. Bauman and Charles Chase

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 76, No. 4 (Jan., 1971), pp. 722-733
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2776436

Accessed: 08-06-2016 03:14 UTC
James Baldwin (1955, p. 68) says, “It is part of the price the Negro pays
for his position in that society that . . . he is almost always acting.” This
implies that playing the role of “Negro” requires the Negro to behave in
ways that are inconsistent with his concept of himself, as others have
observed. Yet if there were no effects of the role one plays upon the self-
concept, American Negroes would not bear the ‘‘mark of oppression,”’
and sociologists would have long since lost interest in role theory. But
Pettigrew (1967), after acknowledging Baldwin’s point, remarks:

Both Whites and Negroes confuse their own roles as being an essential
part of themselves. ...A large body of psychological research convinc-
ingly demonstrates the power of role-playing to change deeply-held atti-
tudes, values, and even conceptions of self. Moreover, these remarkable
changes have been rendered by temporary role adoptions of an exceedingly
trivial nature when compared to the life-long role of “Negro.’’ Imagine,
then, the depth of the effects of having to play a role which has such vast
personal and social significance that it influences virtually all aspects of
daily living. Indeed, the resulting confusion of self-identity and lowering of
self-esteem are two of the most serious “marks of oppression” upon Negro
American personality. [Pp. 151-52]

Whether one approaches the problem from role theory with Pettigrew
or from a psychodynamic perspective with Kardiner and Ovesey (1951,
pp. 303-4), constant playing of the Negro role has produced a damaged
self-concept, one of low self-esteem and self-contempt.

1 Revision of a paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Sociological
Association, Boston, August 1968. This research was supported by grants from the
U.S. Children’s Bureau (PH 300C-1, PH 301, PH 301C-1) and the Carolina Population
Center. Marie Cloney performed invaluable service both in computation and suggest-
ing approaches for analysis. Our thanks to Glen Elder for reading earlier versions of
the manuscript and for fruitful analytic suggestions.
Among the most clear-cut aspects of this process is the well-docu-
mented negative evaluation of skin pigmentation by Negroes. Several
decades of research have demonstrated that Negroes themselves have
defined dark skin as undesirable and light skin as desirable. This scale of
values has formed the basis for judging the attractiveness of others as
well as a determinant of self-esteem (Dollard 1957; Drake and Cayton
1962; Kardiner and Ovesey 1964; Warner, Junker, and Adams 1941).
Case history material on the Negro family contains numerous observa-
tions of children with light skin receiving preferential treatment from
their own parents (Dollard 1957; Drake and Cayton 1962; Kardiner and
Ovesey 1964; Warner et al. 1941). Negro periodicals have long contained
advertisements for skin lighteners. Kardiner and Ovesey (1951, p. 253)
report the pathetic case of a mother who used a daily bleach bath on her
dark-skinned child. The presence of skin color attitudes can be observed
in Negro children as young as four years old (Asher and Allen 1969; Clark
1963; Clark and Clark 1947; Goodman 1964; Landreth and Johnson
1953; Morland 1958; Mussen 1953; Stevenson and Stewart 1958; Trager
and Yarrow 1952). Herndon (1969) remarks how these evaluations domi-
nate interaction among the Negro high school children he observed in the
1950s:

Every common derisive word, all the abusive nicknames, nouns, and adjec-
tives, all the big-lip, liver-lips, burr-heads, fuzzy-heads, kinky-haired,
nappy-headed, big-leg high-ass, apes, monkeys, and too-blacks were
dragged out daily and heaped on each other casually or furiously, con-
tinually and fanatically. The focal point of all this was the head and color
of skin, and the point was ugliness. Nose, lips, hair, all counted, but nothing
else could produce the real anger of a kid being called black. [P. 69]

All studies are consistent in finding that, in comparison with their blacker
brothers, light-skinned Negroes are more likely to be in higher socioeco-
nomic strata, are more likely to experience status advancement, and are
preferred as marriage partners (Davis, Gardner, and Gardner 1965; Dol-
lard 1957; Drake and Cayton 1962; Edwards 1959; Frazier 1940; Frazier
1966; Freeman et al. 1966; Warner et al. 1941).

The importance of skin color as a status determinant has been de-
clining, according to the nearly unanimous opinion of recent observers
(Davis et al. 1965; Drake and Cayton 1962; Frazier 1940; Glenn 1963).
To our knowledge, no one has published any systematic evidence of this
decline, and in one recent paper Freeman et al. (1966) concluded that
marriage patterns by skin color have not changed recently. Recent
writers have offered the material for explanation: during the period of
racial activism, Negroes have rejected the old role of ‘““Negro” and are
inventing a new role for themselves which departs radically from the
acceptance of inferiority. With the new role comes a new self-concept.
The entire movement for the serious study of “black culture,” and the
glorification of social and biological characteristics peculiar to Negroes
(Lincoln 1961), can be seen as an explicit fashioning of a new self-concept
consistent with the new behavior.

The suggestions of decline in importance of skin color are not a phe-
nomenon of the late sixties. Edwards (1959) reported over a decade ago
that there were at that time observable changes in skin color distributions
between older and younger Negro professionals. As early as 1963, at a
conference to study the Negro self-concept, Negro observers were sug-
gesting that research on the influence of color on personality completed
twenty or more years before “might be quite wrong in the context of
today’s sit-ins, marches, wake-ins, picketings, and so forth” (Kvaraceus
et al. 1965, p. 43). One Negro leader was quoted at that time as saying,
“Tt is interesting to note that all the major leaders among Negroes today
tend to be quite Negroid in appearance. In fact, my black skin has a
great value among Negroes today. I do remember a time when being as
black as I am did not have much value, but today it is different’’
(Kvaraceus et al. 1965, p. 43). If this observer is typical, then black really
is beautiful, and rather than looking for a disappearance of the relation-
ship between skin color and status, we might well look for a reversal of
the relationship. Others at that conference were not so sanguine about
the future, concluding that “unfortunately it hardly seems possible that
a reversal of the value system will occur for many, and certainly not for a
long time to come” (Kvaraceus et al. 1965, p. 16).

The present paper presents data to examine the trend of relationships
between skin color, status attributes, and mate selection. This examina-
tion has been guided by the conservative hypothesis that the older rela-
tionship has been declining.? The basic structure of our argument is that
the Negro struggle to escape from inferior status is accompanied by a
change in the evaluation of differential skin color within the Negro com-
munity, which will change self-concepts and social judgments and even-
tually make skin color irrelevant to status placement and mate selection.
indicated by the father’s occupation was drawn, and interviews with
1,700 of the mothers were obtained. From these interviews a sample
stratified on the basis of social class and social mobility was drawn, and
interviews were completed with 350 of the husbands. The data reported
here are for the couples in which complete information was obtained
from both spouses.

Negro females interviewed the wives, and Negro males interviewed
the husbands a month or more later. Skin color of the respondent was rated
by the interviewer on a five-point scale ranging from “very light’ to
“black.”’ Skin color was judged from the face; no color chart was pro-
vided. We assume that a genetically accurate estimate was unnecessary
since the operation of skin color as a determinant of life chances is pre-
sumably through its perception in social situations, and this method most
accurately approximates the perception of skin color in the social set-
ting.’ Husbands’ and fathers’ occupations were coded on a seven-position
Warner-type scale (Warner, Meeker, and Eells 1949, pp. 136-38, 140-41)
and, for some analyses, collapsed into middle and lower class. For some
analyses a person is considered socially mobile if his present class differs
from that of his household head when the respondent was age ten to
fourteen. For other analyses, mobility was arranged on a thirteen-point
scale, ranging from one (six positions downward) through seven (no
change) to thirteen (six positions upward), using the seven-position occu-
pational placement.

We have assumed that educational, occupational, and mate-selection
decisions are made at approximately the same age for different age
cohorts. Since mate selection and status are conceptually linked for
females, we have selected comparisons of successive marriage cohorts as
the only available and uniformly applicable reflection of changes over
time. We established four years-of-marriage categories for some analyses:
one to two, three to five, six to eight, and nine or more;‘ this yielded a
total of about 65 cases in both the first and third categories, and 105 in
each of the other categories. For some analyses we were required to col-
lapse the data into categories representing less than six and six or more
years of marriage. The earlier married groups were mostly in their thirties
(mean age was thirty-five for men, thirty-one for women). They were of
high school age during the 1940s and early 1950s. The more recently
married groups were mostly in their twenties (mean age was twenty-eight
for men, twenty-four for women), of high school age during the big days
of the civil rights movement in the 1950s. The group married earlier was
already adult when these events occurred; half were married by 1955.
One might expect that heightened racial consciousness would have in-
fluenced the recently married group in time to have an effect on educa-
tional, occupational, and mate-selection decisions, while the earlier mar-
ried group may have been exposed to these influences too late for it to
have had an impact on many status-relevant decisions. The fact remains,
however, that we are testing longitudinal hypotheses from data which are
cross-sectional.

Individual cases in the sample were weighted with the reciprocals of
the sampling fractions in order to compensate for the biases introduced
by unequal sampling ratios.

This study has several limitations which must be recognized when
viewing the findings. First, it includes people in only one city who are
parents of a recent birth event and married and living together. It thus
omits those who are unmarried or in broken marriages, and overrepre-
sents the fertile. Second, the completion rate was about two out of
three.* Third, in order to get a sufficient number of middle-class respon-
dents, and upwardly and downwardly mobile respondents, widely dis-
parate sampling rates had to be used. This introduces problems in
estimating variance for significance tests, for it is clear that when a
parameter calculation contains some cases which are entered a number
of times, the variance is less than had that many cases actually been
interviewed and the data for each entered.* Solutions for this problem
have not been published. Many other researchers have either not recog-
nized the problem or ignored it. Finally, as mentioned above, a longi-
5 To see if the total female sample (all 1,700 women interviewed) was biased with
respect to certain variables, we compared the interviewed cases with the entire popula-
tion on ten variables included on the vital certificates: sex of baby, gestation, month
of delivery, census tract of residence, age of mother, legitimacy status, number of
children, number of children born alive, total number of pregnancies, and birth weight.
There were no substantial differences between the samples and the population for any
of these comparisons. We also prepared correlation matrices relating each of the ten
variables with each other within the interviewed samples and the total population.
The values obtained for the interviewed cases and the population were similar. We
concluded that the larger sample is representative of the total population with respect

to these ten variables. This does not mean, however, that this is true for the smaller
number of women used in this analysis, their husbands, or for other variables.

6 This inflates significance tests by a small but unknown amount. We know our esti-
mates of other parameters are unbiased, but our probability of finding significant
differences is spuriously increased. Inflation also increases the probability of achieving
statistical significance by virtue of increase in numbers. To guard against achieving
significance due to this, the actual number of cases interviewed rather than the
weighted totals were entered into the calculation of tests of significance.
FINDINGS FOR MEN

Since examination of contingency tables revealed that not all of our rela-
tionships were linear, we calculated 7’s on the relationships between male
skin color and several status variables using four marital duration cate-
gories. Table 1 presents the 7 values. (Negative signs mean dark skin is a
disadvantage.) Examination of the 7 values indicates that for each vari-
able for each subsequent marital duration category there is a shift away
from dark skin being disadvantaged, until in the shortest duration cate-
gory the dark-skinned men are at an advantage. For the sixteen 7 values

TABLE 1

7 VALUES FOR RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN DARKNESS OF MALE
SKIN COLOR AND SELECTED STATUS VARIABLES,
BY YEARS OF MARRIAGE

 

 

 

 

Years Husband Wife Wife Husband
Married Education Education Skin Color Mobility
+.55 +.26 27 +.61

+.54 +.54 35 +.45

66 +.64 —.39 +.48

— .86 —.78 — .55 — .66

 

 

Nors,—Signs have been placed on the » values to indicate direction of the rela-
tionship in those instances where it was obvious from inspection of the contingency
shown, the only exception to this statement is for the relationship be-
tween darkness of male skin color and skin color of spouses.? We will

examine this special case in the last section.

We next examined the relationship between skin color and four status
variables by contingency table analysis, this time introducing husband’s
occupation and family income. Table 2 presents the contingency coef-
ficients, with negative signs indicating dark skin at a disadvantage. In
every case, the two marital duration groups show opposite signs, are
significantly different for the two time periods, and show dark-skinned
men at an advantage in the recently married group.’

7 We also performed standard Pearsonian correlation analysis of the relationships
shown in table 1. For simplicity we have omitted tables showing these data, but they
show exactly the same patterns as table 1.

8 Because of our surprise at the reversal of the status relationship for men, and because
skin color is related to age in the sample (more of the darker skinned are older), we
examined the data using partial correlation. Controlling for age, for those married six
or more years, darkness of skin color is negatively but not significantly related to
mobility (riv.3 = +.16).
What accounts for the greater likelihood of the recently married dark-
skinned men to be upwardly mobile? Are they now the recipients of
positive discriminatory benefits? Has black pride made the darker-
skinned men more ambitious? The interview schedule included a measure
which bears on the last question: job-mobility orientation, or the extent
to which the man was willing to sacrifice health, friends, family, and
familiar surroundings to get a better job.® The data in table 3 show that

TABLE 2

CONTINGENCY COEFFICIENTS FOR THE RELATIONSHIPS
BETWEEN DARKNESS OF MALE SKIN
COLOR AND STATUS

 

 

 

Years Husband Wife Husband Family
Married Education Education Occupation Income
1-5.... -093 +.225* +.166 +.144
6+....  —.279* —.116 —.157 — .312*

 

Nots.—The number of cases on which the values are calculated ranges from
162 to 175. Skin color is collapsed into three categories: light (very light plus light),
medium, and dark (dark plus black). Signs have been placed on the coefficients to
indicate direction of the relationship in the instances where it was obvious from in-
spection of the contingency tables.

* x2 significant at p < .05.
the darkest-skinned men are oriented toward making sacrifices to ad-
vance, with each progressively lighter-skin group less strongly oriented.
For men married less than six years, the zero-order correlation between
skin color and mobility is .17 (p < .05), but the partial correlation ad-
justed for mobility orientation is only .11 (N.S.). The minimal contribu-
tion of skin color to mobility when controlling for orientation is more
obvious in table 4, the summary of analysis of variance for men married
most recently. In a regression of mobility orientation on mobility, the
added variance explained by including skin color in the model is neg-
ligible. Adding mobility orientation to a regression of skin color with
mobility explains twice as much variation as skin color alone. From this
analysis, we conclude that skin color makes a significant contribution to

TABLE 4
ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE: MALE SKIN COLOR AND MOBILITY ORIENTATION
(INDEPENDENT VARIABLES) WITH INTERGENERATIONAL OCCUPATIONAL
MOBILITY (DEPENDENT VARIABLE), FOR MEN MARRIED LESS THAN SIX
YEARS

 

 

 

 

 

df ss MS F
Explained:................05 2 1,367.57 683.78 8.07**
By mobility orientation alone 1 1,198.18 Lee see
By adding skin color....... 1 169.39 169.39 2.00
By skin color alone......... 1 448.19 tee wee
By adding mobility orienta-
tion... 2... eee eee 1 919.38 919.38 10.85*
Unexplained................ 168 14,236.30 84.74 see
Total................005 170 15,603.87
p< 01. ** py < 001.

mobility only through increasing mobility orientation. We reason that
the mobility experience of recently married men with dark skins is due
to the impact of increased racial pride upon their orientation toward
achieving occupational mobility.

It is of interest to note that among men married six or more years,
those with dark skins have relatively high mobility orientation (r = .25,
p < 01), but they are not more likely than those with lighter skins to
have experienced upward mobility (r = .00). The lack of a relationship
between skin color and mobility in the presence of a relationship between
skin color and mobility orientation suggests that racial pride also in-
creased the mobility orientation of these men, but since status-relevant
decisions were made prior to the heightening of racial pride, mobility
orientation was not translated into mobility.!®

10 For those who may find the contingency relationship of skin color to mobility
orientation too strong to be believed, and suspect relationships between it and other
An alternative explanation for our findings is based on the supposition
that black-skinned Negroes have always known that they would have to
work harder and sacrifice to get ahead. Perhaps they even brought up
their dark-skinned sons to be more work oriented. During the recent
period, more job opportunities have opened up for Negroes generally.
When this occurred, it was the blackest who were already equipped with
the psychological orientation which allowed them to move in on the new
opportunities. This interpretation is in no way inconsistent with our
data, and on that account it must be considered seriously. From any of
the published materials relating skin color to personality, however, it is
hard to see how one would predict that, even when “nothing has hap-
pened” on the race front, the blackest men would be the most ambitious,

TABLE 5

n VALUES FOR RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN DARKNESS OF
FEMALE SKIN COLOR AND SELECTED STATUS
VARIABLES, BY YEARS OF MARRIAGE

 

 

Inperenpent Varrasie (Wire's Skin Conor)

 

 

Derenpent VARIABLE —_ Husband Wife Husband
(Years Marrrsp) Education Education Mobility
—.53 —.47 — .53

—.43 —.47 — .52

—.77 — .55 —.35

—.73 — .69 —.57
MATE SELECTION BY SKIN COLOR

A closer look at mate-selection patterns by skin color reveals the nature
of the sex difference in the changed evaluation of skin color. We can
examine the strength of the relationship by examining the 7’s for the four

TABLE 6

DISTRIBUTION OF SKIN COLOR OF WIFE BY SKIN COLOR OF HUSBAND
AND BY NUMBER OF YEARS MARRIED

 

 

Skin Cotor or Wire

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Light Medium Dark
Sgn Cotor Total
or Huspanp N* %t N % N % (%)
Married Less Than Six Years
Light...... 24 48.3 21 35.0 5 16.7 100.0
Medium... 18 12.5 53 71.8 15 15.7 100.0
Dark...... 16 40.4, 15 40.7, 5 18.9 100.0
Married Six or More Years
Light...... 24 68.3 14 11.0 3 20.7 100.0
Medium... 34 16.1 33 55.2 20 28.7 100.0
Dark...... 10 19.6 19 49.5 12 30.9 100.0

 

mies indicate percentages with statistically significant differences using z-test with
p<.0l.

* Number of cases interviewed.

t Percentages are derived from the inflated sample.

marriage cohorts in table 1. The decline in the relationship between skin
color of spouses with each more recent marriage cohort is discernible.
A contingency table analysis (table 6) compares two marriage duration
groups. For the longer-married group, lights overselect lights and under-
select mediums and darks, and this is symmetrical by sex. The most
interesting difference in the recent cohort is the increased probability of
dark men marrying light women. This points up the shift in status value
of dark skin for men but not for women.

1A contingency table analysis and a Pearsonian correlation analysis (not shown)
were also performed, with essentially identical results. It therefore appears extremely

unlikely that the relationships shown in table 5 are a fortuitous accident of one type
of analysis.
CONCLUSIONS

We have demonstrated that for this Negro, urban, married sample of
recent parents, the relationship between skin color and status variables
has not shown any important change in recent marriage cohorts of wom-
en, so that the traditional status advantage of light-skinned women has
not significantly altered. For men in this sample, relationships between
skin color and status attributes have shown a dramatic shift between
recent marriage cohorts. Among those married since 1960, the blackest
men fare better in status acquisition than those with lighter skin. The
reverse is true for those married earlier. The dark-skinned men of what-
ever marital duration are far more likely to have high job-mobility
orientation than light-skinned men. Furthermore, dark skin is only as-
sociated with status mobility through its relationship to high mobility
orientation, and only for those married since 1960. For those with dark
skin married earlier, job-mobility orientation appears only as a potential
source of frustration. Our explanation of this finding is that racial pride
makes the blackest the proudest and most motivated. If this motivation
comes before a man has crossed all his status bridges, it can be converted
into status assets.

In formulating our initial hypothesis we clearly underestimated the
impact of the Negro struggle for racial equality on the skin-color atti-
tudes and self-concepts of men in the Negro community surveyed, and
therefore did not anticipate that a reversal of traditional findings could
already have occurred. Our data strongly suggest that the trends in this
new direction started at least as early as the late fifties and are therefore
associated with the entire period of Negro activism. The current popular
glorification of blackness and Negro characteristics generally appears in
perspective as the continuation of this trend ‘on beyond zero,” at least
for men.
Frazier, E. Franklin. 1940. Negro Youth at the Crossways. Washington, D.C.: American
Council on Education.

Frazier, E. Franklin. 1966. The Negro Family in the United States. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press. .

Freeman, Howard E., J. Michael Ross, David Armor, and Thomas F. Pettigrew. 1966.
“Color gradation and attitudes among middle-income Negroes.”’ American Socio-
logical Review 31 (June) :365-75.

Glenn, Norval D. 1963. ‘Negro Prestige Criteria: A Case Study in the Basis of Pres-
tige.” American Journal of Sociology 68 (March) :645-57.

Goodman, Mary Ellen. 1964. Race Awareness in Young Children. New York: Collier
Books.

Herdon, James. 1969. The Way It Spozed to Be. New York: Bantam.

Kardiner, Abram, and Lionel Ovesey. 1951. The Mark of Oppression. Cleveland:
World.

Kvaraceus, William C., John S. Gibson, Franklin Patterson, Bradbury Seasholes,
and Jean D. Grambs. 1965. Negro Self-Concept: Implications for School and Citizen-
ship. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Landreth, Catherine, and Barbara Child Johnson. 1953. ‘““Young Children’s Responses
to a Picture and Inset Test Designed to Reveal Reaction to Persons of Different
Skin Color.’ Child Development 24 (March) :63-79.

Lincoln, C. Eric. 1961. The Black Muslims in America. Boston: Beacon.

Morland, J. Kenneth. 1958. “Racial Recognition by Nursery School Children in
Lynchburg, Virginia.” Social Forces 37: 132-37.

Mussen, Paul H. 1953. “Differences between the TAT Responses of Negro and White
Boys.” Journal of Consulting Psychology 17:373-76.

Pettigrew, Thomas. 1967. “Negro American Personality: The Role and Its Burdens.”’
In Current Perspectives in Social Psychology, edited by Edwin P. Hollander and
Raymond G. Hunt. New York: Oxford University Press.

Stevenson, Harold W., and Edward C. Stewart. 1958. “A Developmental Study of
Racial Awareness in Young Children.”’ Child Development 29 (September) :399—
409.

Trager, Helen G., and Marian Radke Yarrow. 1952. They Learn What They Live.
New York: Harper.

Warner, W. Lloyd, Buford H. Junker, and Walter A. Adams. 1941. Color and Human
Nature. Washington, D.C.: American Council on Education.

Warner, W. Lloyd, Marchia Meeker, and Kenneth Eells. 1949. Social Class in Amer-
ica. Chicago: Science Research Associates.
