Uncle Tom and Mr. Charlie: Metaphysical Pathos in the Study of Racism and Personal
Disorganization

Author(s): John D. McCarthy and William L. Yancey

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 76, No. 4 (Jan., 1971), pp. 648-672
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2776433

Accessed: 08-06-2016 03:08 UTC
This essay presents a critical examination of the vast literature con-
cerning the psychological state of the Negro American. The basic hy-
pothesis that Negro Americans are very likely to experience “crisis of
identity” and exhibit negative self-esteem will be questioned. After a
brief description of the prevailing view of the psychological state of the
Negro American, we will review the major theoretical statements ex-
plaining the assumed low self-esteem and crisis of identity experienced
by black Americans. The third section of the essay reviews empirical
research revealing a considerable amount of ambiguity over, if not
directly challenging, currently held assumptions. In the concluding
section we will present a series of alternative propositions which we will
suggest should be considered in light of the ambiguous data presented
in section three.
the Negro masses and the ability of Negro leaders to discipline and mo-
bilize that power for constructive social change may well be determined
by the ability of a critical mass of Negroes to control their ambivalence
toward themselves and to develop the capacity for genuine and sustained
respect for those Negroes who are worthy of confidence and respect”
(p. 197). He is clearly comparing what might be with the actual state
of affairs. Negro political mobilization is seen as inhibited by ambiva-
lence toward self.

Silberman (1964), in his widely known work, Crisis in Black and
White, states the position in this manner: “The Negroes’ demand for
recognition is a crucial part of the struggle to overcome the devastation
that the past three hundred fifty years have wrought on Negro personal-
ity. The apathy, the aimlessness, the lack of interest in education that
characterize the Negro lower classes, and the crisis of identity that
afflicts Negroes of all classes, stem from their sense of dependence and
powerlessness—their conviction that ‘Mr. Charlie’ controls everything,
Negro leaders included, and that he has the cards stacked so that Negroes
can never win” (p. 198).

In The Negro in America, Rose (1948) attributes not only problems
of self-esteem of the Negro American to majority pressures, but also the
totality of the deviation of the black community from middle-class
white standards to majority prejudice and discrimination. He says,
“The instability of the Negro family, the inadequacy of educational
facilities for Negroes, the emotionalism in the Negro church, the in-
sufficiency and unwholesomeness of Negro recreational activity, the ex-
cess of Negro sociable organizations, the narrowness of interest of the
average Negro, the provincialism of his political thinking, the high Negro
crime rate, the cultivation of the arts to the neglect of other fields, super-
stition, personality difficulties, and other ‘characteristic’ traits are mainly
forms of social ill-health, which, for the most part, are created by caste
pressures” (p. 294).

Pettigrew’s review of the literature on Negro American psychology
reaches similar conclusions. He (1964) writes: “The personality con-
sequences of this situation can be devastating—confusion of self-identity,
lowered self-esteem, perception of the world as a hostile place, and
serious sex-role conflicts” (p. 25), but cautions that all Negroes in the
United States do not respond to the caste situation in the same manner.
He outlines three major responses to oppression: moving toward, moving
against, and moving away from the oppressor (p. 27). It is revealing that
Pettigrew’s review of this literature suggests that for each alternative
response, psychopathological behavior of one form or another is evident
(pp. 27-48).

Few authors challenge this general thesis, though one does encounter
American Journal of Sociology

a few tentative challenges. Coles (1964) questions the generalizability
of the assumptions when he writes, “Though in no way do I deny what
Kardiner and Ovesey have called ‘the mark of oppression,’ it remains
equally true that alongside suffering I have encountered a resilience and
an incredible capacity for survival” (p. 348).

Erikson (1966), discussing the application of the concept of identity
to race relations, issues less than a strong challenge when he writes:

Again, the literature abounds in descriptions of how the Negro, instead,
found escape into musical or spiritual worlds, or expressed his rebellion in
compromises of behavior now viewed as mocking caricatures, such as
obstinate meekness, exaggerated child likeness, or superficial submissive-
ness. And yet, is “the Negro’’ not often all too summarily and all too ex-
clusively discussed in such a way that his negative identity is defined only
in terms of his defensive adjustments to the dominant white majority?
Do we (and can we) know enough about the relationship of positive and
negative elements within the Negro personality and within the Negro com-
munity? This alone would reveal how negative is negative and how posi-
tive, positive. [P. 155]

For the most part, however, there is a rather clear consensus: the
black man’s life and personality are disorganized as a result of white
prejudice and discrimination.

In their various attempts to demonstrate the negative consequences
of caste victimization, social scientists have, in their description of the
Negro American, unwittingly provided scientific credibility for many
white-held stereotypes of the Negro. There have been, no doubt, im-
portant political and ideological reasons for such a position, and as
Rainwater (1966) has noted, social research has attempted to “demon-
strate that responsibility for the disadvantages Negroes suffer lies square-
ly upon the white caste which derives economic, prestige, and psychic
benefits from operation of the system” (p. 174).

Indeed, the argument that psychological disabilities result from prej-
udice and discrimination did play an important part in the evidence
presented to the U.S. Supreme Court preceding the 1954 school desegre-
gation decision. It is our contention, however, that such a view has
found wide support as much because it complemented political strategy
as because it was based upon solid evidence. If the description is a dis-
tortion of the social facts, as we argue, then it has probably had the
negative consequence of reinforcing the syndrome which it suggests
exists.
The Consequences of Uncle Tom

The application of the first perspective has been relatively straight-
forward. Since his arrival in the United States, the Negro has been a
member of a powerless minority. The powerful white majority demanded
that the Negro play the Uncle Tom role, characterized by obsequious-
ness. At times such a role was necessary for physical survival, and it
normally produced more of what little could be gained from the white
oppressor. But this behavior was for white consumption only. Among
other Negroes another “truer” role was manifest. Such disparate be-
havior, however, according to this perspective, creates problems result-
ing in confusion and a crisis of identity. It may also produce self-hatred
among some Negroes who attempt unsuccessfully to resist the Uncle
Tom role.

Stanley Elkins (1959), in drawing the analogy between the concen-
tration camp and American slavery, presents a clear use of the role-per-
sonality perspective. He notes that the expectations of the pervasive and
dependent roles of the prisoner and the slave were exacting. Within
these narrow boundaries developed the role of the childlike “Sambo”
among American slaves which did not exist in Latin America or in
Africa. Elkins suggests that while such a role was perhaps difficult for
the arriving slaves to learn, before Emancipation the Sambo role was
fully institutionalized. With Emancipation the move from “slave” to
“accommodating Negro” under Jim Crow apparently was not a difficult
transition.

John Dollard’s (1937) description of the accommodated Southern
Negro is similar to Elkins’s description of Sambo. Dollard writes: “If the
reader has ever seen Stepin Fetchit in the movies, he can picture this
type of character. Fetchit always plays the part of a well-accommodated
lower-class Negro, whining, vacillating, shambling, stupid, and moved
by very simple cravings’ (p. 257). Although Dollard’s research was
carried out in the 1930s, such a view remains viable. For example,
American Journal of Sociology

Pettigrew (1964) notes that “being a Negro in America is less of a racial
identity than a necessity to adopt a subordinate social role. The effects
of this ‘Negro role’ are profound and lasting. Evaluating himself by the
way others react to him, the Negro may grow into the servile role; in time
the person and the role become indistinguishable. The personality con-
sequences of the situation can be devastating—confusion of self-identity,
lower self-esteem, perception of the world as a hostile place, and serious
sex-role conflicts” (p. 25).?

Dollard (1937) takes issue with a simple correspondence between the
Negro’s role and personality by pointing out that the role the Negro
reveals to whites should not be taken as his only or “real’’ self. The
Uncle Tom role is but a facade used to manipulate the oppressor and
reveals little of the ‘“‘true self” of the oppressed (see also Elkins 1959;
Odum 1910).

It is problematic whether such an adaptation has positive or negative
consequences for personality organization. Bettelheim’s (1943) research in
concentration camps indicates that in extreme situations there are nega-
tive personality consequences. Dollard’s (1937) description of the accom-
modating Negro suggests that accommodation is fraught with dangers
for the personalities engaged in it: “Accommodation involves the renun-
ciation of protest or aggression against the undesirable conditions of life,
and the organization of the character so that protest does not appear,
but acceptance does. It may come to pass in the end that the unwelcomed
force is idealized, that one identifies with it and takes it into the person-
ality; it sometimes even happens that what is at first resented and feared
is finally loved” (p. 255).

Pettigrew (1964) reasons similarly concerning the effects of main-
taining such a dual identity when he says, “Negroes may handle tense
interracial situations by attempting to separate their true selves from
their role as ‘Negro.’ Allport points out that this mechanism actually
involves a mild dissociation; one is ‘himself’ with other Negroes but
transforms his behavior to meet the expectations of prejudiced whites.
Some such dissociation occurs in the acting out of many social roles, but

2 The straightforward connection between the structural position of Southern Negroes
and the role of “accommodating Negro” is, Dollard suggests, more problematic than
that suggested by Pettigrew. Even in ‘‘Southerntown,” where there were relatively
few alternatives available for the Negro, Dollard found variation in the degree to
which accommodation was accepted. Lower-class Negroes and those with less educa-
tion, that is, those who had “‘least access to a divergent conception of the Negro’s
place in American society,” were more likely to accept accommodation (1937, p. 256).
Conversely, the more cosmopolitan Negroes—those not limited to white Southerners
as a source of identity and esteem—who had been exposed to alternative conceptions
of “the Negro” were less likely to accept the role and identity provided by Southern
whites.
Self-Identity through Interaction

A second perspective, following the emphasis of Kardiner and Ovesey
(1951), suggests that the crisis of identity and loss of self-esteem derive
largely from the images of himself which the Negro receives from the
white community: the self emerges through interaction with significant
others. Developing self-identity and self-esteem depends not merely upon
objective social characteristics, but also upon the judgment of these char-
acteristics by relevant others.

Again, the application of this theoretical position to the situation of
the Negro American has been straightforward. Observers have assumed
that Negroes view whites as significant others: the views of whites, who
believe in Negro inferiority and act upon such beliefs, directly affect
Negro self-identity and self-esteem. ‘‘Consciously or unconsciously,”
writes Pettigrew, “Negroes accept, in part, these assertions of their in-
feriority” (p. 9). Beyond the subjective evaluations and images held by
whites it is also argued that differences in schools, housing, employment,
and income are used as criteria for self-evaluation and identity (Proshan-
sky and Newton 1968).

Kardiner and Ovesey (1951) state: ‘This central problem of Negro
adaptation is oriented to discrimination he suffers and the consequences
of this discrimination for the self-referential aspects of his social orienta-
tion. In simple words, it means that his self-esteem suffers (which is
self-referential) because he is constantly receiving an unpleasant image
of himself from the behavior of others” (p. 302). They suggest that in
order to maintain “internal balance and to protect himself from being
overwhelmed by it [the Mark of Oppression] [the Negro] must initiate
restitutive maneuvers in order to keep functioning—all quite automatic
and unconscious” (p. 303). A major consequence of these defensive
measures is the development of a social facade; the Uncle Tom role
develops not because the Negro is placed in that role by whites, but
rather as an adaptive strategy to protect the self from negative evalua-
tions. In a word, the dual personality of the Negro is seen as a solution
American Journal of Sociology

to personality-identity problems rather than a cause as the first per-
spective suggests.’

Rainwater (1966), in a recent analysis of the lower-class Negro family,
employs a similar theoretical perspective. Although he suggests a dif-
ferent locus of relevant evaluations, he arrives at similar conclusions.
While Clark, Kardiner and Ovesey, and others have argued that the
images Negroes receive from white society are the major determinant of
low self-esteem, Rainwater suggests that white discrimination and prej-
udice are but the secondary cause of the Negroes’ poor identity forma-
tion. A closer examination reveals that Negroes victimize Negroes. He
writes: “In short, whites, by their greater power, create situations in
which Negroes do the dirty work of caste victimization for them” (p. 175).
Further, “at least in the urban North the initial development of racial
identity in these terms has very little directly to do with relations with
whites” (p. 204).

Rainwater views the family as the major source of identity. Out of the
lower-class family, particularly the unstable one, he says, comes a “weak
and debased person, who can expect only partial gratification by less
than straight-forward means” (p. 206).

It is argued that through the socialization process, as it takes place
within the unstable family and the lower-class neighborhood peer group,
negative identities develop, since both parents and peers regularly present
the individual with derogatory evaluations.*

The second perspective, then, stresses negative self-evaluation over
“crisis of identity,” though both perspectives agree on negative self-
evaluation. The perspectives differ with respect to whether the Uncle
Tom role is a cause or consequence of the assumed negative self-evalua-
tion.
positions which stress the interaction of caste and class factors in ex-
plaining the negative self-image presumed to be prevalent in the Negro
American community.

The first variant on this theme stresses the role of economic marginali-
ty which results from caste victimization. The two consequences of such
marginality seen as most important are female-headed families and jobs
which lack any measure of prestige, both of which are seen as producing,
though by different processes, a negative view of the self.

The relatively high frequency of female-headed families among Ne-
groes, sometimes termed matrifocality, is seen to be perpetuated by the
marginal economic position of the Negro adult male. The occupations
available to the unskilled Negro man normally lack the security and
income necessary to maintain a household. Further, such jobs (as, for
example, waiter, cook, orderly, dishwasher, etc.) are seen by some to
carry a feminine connotation (Proshansky and Newton 1968). Despite
the lack of job opportunities available, the Negro male is still under the
general societal prescription that he fulfill his function as provider, so
he must work if he is to be evaluated positively as a man and father.
The marginal employment situation results in his inability to fulfill his
role as male head of household, and is said to result in a serious loss of
self-esteem. Proshansky and Newton (1968) summarize much of this
literature with the statement that “his predicament may take the form
of a ‘self-fulfilling prophecy.’ He is told that he is ‘no good’ and ‘irrespon-
sible’ and to some extent he internalizes these judgments which in turn
influence his actions. When he fails, no one is surprised” (p. 205). Erikson
(1966), exploring this issue, suggests that, particularly in an industrial
setting, such imbalance “may, indeed, become the gravest factor in
personality disorganization” (p. 167).5 Finally, this pattern is said to pro-
duce even more dire consequences for his children if the male leaves
the household unit. Pettigrew (1964) provides us with a relevant review
of research indicating that the specific link between poverty and person-
ality development takes place in the family. These studies suggest that
children raised in broken families are more likely to be hedonistic, less
accurate in predicting time, less socially responsible, less oriented toward
achievement, more prone toward delinquency, and are likely to manifest
problems of sex-role identity (pp. 17-19). Thus, the institutional ar-
5 The traditional literature suggests that Jim Crow was directed more at the Negro
male rather than the Negro female. Black women are said to be allowed more freedom,
suffer less discrimination, and are provided more opportunities than black men. As a
consequence, Negro men are said to have lower self-esteem than Negro women. While
this argument has no implications for racial differences in self-esteem among women,
the arguments presented earlier hold for females as well as males. Given the cultural
prescriptions relating employment to male authority and the male role, one expects

to find a similar sexual difference among lower-class whites, that is, underemployed
men should have lower self-esteem than their female counterparts.
American Journal of Sociology

rangements of slavery and Jim Crow are said to have been replaced by
racial and economic marginality that now function as major forces which
produce the loss of self-esteem and personality crisis of the adult male
and the pathological character of the socialization process in female-
headed households.

While the focus upon class factors in this literature normally means
attention to the Negro’s marginal economic circumstances, Frazier (1957)
in his controversial classic, Black Bourgeoisie, attends to the peculiar
situation of the middle-class Negro, thereby avoiding the implications
of economic marginality. Frazier’s study is consistent with the general
tendency of this literature to characterize the Negro as pathological, no
matter what his circumstances, by suggesting that the black bourgeoisie
is ambivalent about identification with the ‘“Negro masses” and responds
by a flight into a world of ‘make believe” based upon emulation of the
white middle class. “Since the world of make-believe cannot insulate the
black bourgeoisie completely from the world of reality, the members of
this class exhibit considerable confusion and conflict in their personali-
ties” (p. 25). So Frazier rejects the argument that the marginal economic
circumstances of the Negro American are responsible for his personality
difficulties. Cultural marginality coupled with the unique situation of
economic security among an oppressed people produce similar personality
consequences.
do, of course, make an informal comparison. Having treated a number
of white patients in therapy, a racial comparison is implicit, but it is
certainly not systematic. One of the many conclusions drawn from this
evidence by the authors is that the social definition of blackness in
American society is in some measure responsible for the self-hatred and
lack of esteem within this sample. After intensive review of Kardiner and
Ovesey’s case-study material, Rohrer and Edmonson (1960) conclude that
only seven of the cases examined exhibit self-hatred and consequent
lack of self-esteem. Further, they note that five of these cases had under-
gone previous therapeutic experience. Whether or not the self-hatred
evidenced by any of the subjects is a result of prejudice and discrimina-
tion must also remain in doubt in the absence of a formal comparison.

In addressing the hypothesis of black self-hatred with a formal com-
parison, a number of possibilities present themselves. One might compare
self-hatred among black Americans with self-hatred among black Afri-
cans or black Europeans. The literature surveyed above would predict
greater prevalence of self-hatred among black North Americans than
among black South Americans or Africans, but the possibility also exists
that Americans are more prone to self-hatred than Africans (Elkins 1959).
The racial comparison within the United States appears most meaning-
ful to us, however, so the following review will attend only to evidence
which makes the racial comparison with regard to relevant variables.

We would prefer to have systematic evidence of the type outlined
above on self-esteem, self-hatred, and ambiguous identity, but very
little exists. Therefore, it becomes necessary to broaden the range of
indicators which will be accepted as pertinent to the prevailing literature.
We shall also accept anomie, mental disorder, suicide, and alcoholism as
indicators of personal disorganization. Acceptance of such indicators
involves a number of assumptions which may not be warranted. On the
other hand, all appear to represent personal disorganization, and there
is evidence that they possess at least some measure of common variance
(see Rushing 1968; Vanderpool 1969).
American Journal of Sociology

Berelson and Steiner 1964). It is a rather long jump in our opinion, how-
ever, from racial awareness, preference for white dolls, and assignment
of inferior roles to brown dolls to self-hatred on the part of such children.
There are a number of plausible explanations for such findings which
have nothing to do with self-hatred. Personality ratings accompanying
one piece of research in this tradition demonstrate that the Negro chil-
dren were more cheerful, more curious, more inclined toward leadership,
kinder, and more sensitive (Goodman 1952)—hardly picturesque of
rampant self-hatred. In our opinion the evidence embodied in this litera-
ture is open to various interpretations, especially since much of it does
not make a racial comparison (see Greenwald and Oppenheim 1968). We
do not argue that the interpretation commonly made is necessarily in-
correct. It may be correct, but the evidence remains inconclusive.

Is there any evidence which is more directly to the point for black
and white children? A series of studies carried out by Baughman and
Dahlstrom (1968) provides evidence at variance with the conclusions
commonly drawn from the research on Negro and white children. The
results of interviews with Negro and white eighth graders in a rural
Southern community are worth quoting:

When we turn to the self-concepts of these children, their interview
statements about themselves are markedly positive. This is particularly
true for the Negro children, a fact that is at variance with the widely ac-
cepted belief that the self-esteem of the Negro is inevitably damaged, even
at an early age. The Negro children in our sample, forinstance, much more
frequently reported themselves as being popular with their peers than the
white children did. Also, there was a tendency for more Negro than white
children to say that they were very satisfied being the kind of person they
were. In addition, significantly more Negro than white children described
their home life as being happier than that of the average child. Clearly, if
the self-concepts of these Negro children have been unduly damaged, this
fact is not reflected in their interview statements about themselves, nor in
the educational and vocational aspirations which they report for them-
selves (and which they seem optimistic about realizing). [P. 462]

Further, Morris Rosenberg (1965), summarizing ethnic groups’ differ-
ences in self-esteem, concludes, ‘‘We see that Negroes, who are exposed to
the most intense, humiliating, and crippling forms of discrimination in
every institutional area, do not have particularly low self-esteem” (p. 57).
This finding is particularly noteworthy since the Negroes in Rosenberg’s
sample represent the lowest socioeconomic status group, but are about
average on his measure of self-esteem.

Two other studies which purport to measure self-concept of Negro
and white youth based upon national samples of youth of high school
age present evidence which is at variance with the traditional conception
of racial- differences in self-esteem. These studies are both concerned
with academic achievement. The measures of self-concept might better
be termed “academic self-concept.’’ Coleman et al. (1966) report that
“responses to these questions [concerning academic self-concept] do not
indicate differences between Negroes and whites’ (p. 281). McDill,
Meyers, and Rigsby (1966), examining a matched sample of Negro and
white youth of high school age, demonstrate that Negroes display a
higher average self-esteem score than the white sample.

Finally Rosenberg reports the use of his self-esteem scale in another
context involving the racial comparison with adults. He reports that a
colleague “found among attendants [in a mental hospital], who are the
lowest ranking nursing personnel, Negroes had higher self-esteem than
whites, according to our scale’ (p. 63). In interpreting this evidence,
he says, “In this middle Atlantic city, the job of attendant is a relatively
good job for a Negro but a very poor position for a white. Self-esteem
may be more a matter of one’s position within one group than the rank
of the group in relation to other groups” (p. 63).

It is interesting to note the impact of the traditional argument con-
cerning race and self-esteem when one finds authors uncovering what is
apparently negative evidence. Rosenberg is apparently surprised, while
McDill et al. (1966) challenge the validity of the measure and resort to
intellectual gymnastics in order to reinterpret negative evidence into the
traditional argument: “High self-esteem on the part of Negroes is a
defense mechanism against discrimination” (chap. 10, p. 16).
American Journal of Sociology

strate that the white rate is higher than the Negro rate. He admits that
both the survey and the admissions evidence support a view that for
certain disorders the Negro incidence rate may be lower than the white
rate (p. 77).

To avoid accepting incidence rates as indicators of prevalence, we
might use sample survey techniques. There are problems, however, with
adopting such a research strategy. Relatively few persons exhibit severe
mental disorders. A study employing such a strategy, carried out by
Pasamanick et al. (1964), attempted to estimate prevalence rates of
psychoses, psychoneuroses, and psychophysiologic, autonomic, and
visceral disorders based upon clinical evaluations of a subsample of a
larger sample of the population of Baltimore. Though Pasamanick and
his coinvestigators found that the nonwhite (almost totally Negro)
prevalence rate for each of these diagnosed disorders was startlingly
below the white rate, the total number of cases upon which the rates were
based for all of the disorders was eighty-six. The total number of non-
whites so diagnosed, then, was a small proportion of this number, so the
possibility remains strong that such rates are highly unreliable, especially
for the nonwhite population.

A final research strategy which attempts to assess prevalence of men-
tal disorder is the use of paper and pencil tests in sample surveys which
have been previously validated on normal and diagnosed populations.
Dohrenwend (1966), reviewing attempts to assess the prevalence of
treated as well as untreated psychological disorders in this manner,
reports eight studies which make a racial comparison, though without
rigorous socioeconomic status controls. Four of the studies he reviews
show higher rates of disorder for whites and four show higher rates of
disorder for Negroes. Dohrenwend’s own study, carried out in the
Washington Heights section of New York City, does not demonstrate
differences in psychological disorder between his Negro subsamples and
his Jewish and Irish subsamples. With income controlled, the pattern
of differences reported by Dohrenwend between his Negro and Irish
samples is suggestive, though the differences are not large. For respon-
dents who have a family income of $5,000 a year or less, the Irish respon-
dents are more likely to report symptoms of psychological disorder,
while among respondents who have a family income of more than $5,000
a year the Negro respondents are more likely to report such symptoms.

Again it is our opinion that this evidence here suggests rethinking,
rather than acceptance, of the traditional arguments on racial differences
in personal organization. Again we find attempts by authors investi-
gating racial differences in psychological disorder attempting to explain
away what appear to be negative findings. Dohrenwend appeals, though
Suicide

The nonwhite suicide rate in the United States is consistently far below
the comparable white rate (Gibbs 1966; Labovitz 1968). This fact is
normally explained as Pettigrew (1964) explains it: ‘Negro American
aggression is more often turned outward in the form of homicide than
inward as suicide” (p. 78). Such an explanation, in its most simple form,
as stated here, seems no more than a description of a state of affairs
once the proponent accepts the assumption that suicide and homicide
are different forms of aggression stemming from the same causal con-
ditions (see Henry and Short 1954).

We concede that many would regard including mention of racial dif-
ferences in suicide rates here as somewhat tenuous, though there are a
number of commentators on the etiology of suicide who argue that self-
degradation is an important factor in explaining individual suicide
(Kilpatrick 1968). Finally, there is some indication that individual sui-
cide is related to a number of the other personal pathologies under dis-
cussion here (Rushing 1968).

The differences between the white and the nonwhite suicide rate hold
up under sex, age, and socioeconomic status control (Suicide in the
United States, 1967; Rushing 1968; Labovitz 1968).° The pattern of
differences with class controlled, however, is suggestive and deserves
some note here. Two studies demonstrate that the differences between
the white and nonwhite suicide rates are greater at the lower socioeconom-
ic level than they are at the higher socieconomic levels. That is, though
affluent nonwhites are less likely than affluent whites to commit suicide,
the difference at this socioeconomic level is less than the difference when
both groups are poor. For instance, Maris (1969) den. astrates that for
Cook County, Illinois, for the years 1959-63, among males, the higher
the socioeconomic status level the smaller the difference in suicide rate
between whites and nonwhites. Rushing (1969) presents standard mor-
tality rates for suicide for 1950 among males in the United States, and
his data show the same pattern.
that, at least empirically, they have been shown to have some overlap
and are in practice used somewhat interchangeably. There are a large
number of measures which are highly relevant to the comparison we are
interested in making here (Nettler 1957).

The evidence making a racial comparison on measures of anomia or
alienation remains ambiguous. For instance, Middleton (1963) reports
results for a small Florida community which reveal, controlling for years
of education completed, that Negroes are more alienated than whites.
Killian and Grigg (1962), on the other hand, report data for two south-
eastern communities, one with a population of 300,000 and one with a
population of less than 3,000, which show no differences in anomia for
the urban sample and large differences for the rural sample. Killian and
Grigg used a composite measure of social position in making the compari-
sons, and where the differences obtained, Negroes were more likely to be
alienated. Kornhauser, Mayer, and Sheppard (1956), in a study of the
voting behavior of labor union members in Detroit, had occasion to
examine racial differences in anomia. Though the data are not presented
for the racial comparison, and no socioeconomic status control is intro-
duced, they report that Negroes have high anomia ratings in just about
the same proportion as do the whites. Finally, Brink and Harris (1966,
p. 135) conclude, after discussing data from a number of recent national
surveys making comparisons between poor blacks and whites, that “the
net result is that low-income whites feel quite hopelessly caught up in
the forgotten backwash of society.” This evidence certainly casts some
doubt upon the traditional assumptions with regard to racial differences
in alienation.”
DERIVING SOME ALTERNATIVE HYPOTHESES

Since we are convinced that at best the traditional view is only partially
supported by the existing evidence, and further that the effects of the
black experience in its present and historical forms are far more compli-
cated than has normally been assumed, we offer several counterhypothe-
ses here. We feel that such an exercise is useful in that it suggests crucial
tests: such counterhypotheses require for their dismissal evidence which
more clearly supports the traditional hypotheses.

Following the work of Morris Rosenberg (1965) and Stanley Cooper-
smith (1967), we will view self-esteem as an evaluative attitude toward
the self.

Coopersmith (1967) suggests that relative evaluations are important
antecedents or determinants of self-esteem. He notes, in his summary
of prior theoretical statements concerning self-esteem, four principal
factors: “(1) The amount of respectful, accepting and concerned treatment
that the individual receives from significant others in his life. (2) Our
history of successes and the status and position we hold in the world. (3)
Experiences are interpreted and modified in accord with the individual’s
values and aspirations. (4) The individual’s manner of responding to
devaluation” (p. 37). We suggest that these factors are the very assump-
tions employed by those authors reviewed in the second section of this
paper. Indeed, it is Mead, Cooley, and Sullivan, among others, whom
Coopersmith is summarizing (pp. 29-36). We propose such factors here
as guidelines, as we discuss the position of the Negro in the United
States. So, as is evident, we do not propose adopting a radically different
theoretical approach to these issues. We will suggest that with only
minor alterations such factors produce conflicting hypotheses concern-
ing the self-esteem of the Negro American.
Respectful Treatment

The literature on Negro self-esteem has for the most part followed
Kardiner and Ovesey’s assumption that Negroes accept white definitions
of themselves.

In contrast to this assumption, research by social psychologists indi-
cates rather clearly that the sources of evaluation important for self-
identity are individuals occupying social positions quite similar to ego
(Pettigrew 1967). This suggests that Negroes, rather than using whites,
would be most likely to use other Negroes as sources of identity and es-
teem, for a number of reasons; the reality of de facto segregation being
one of the most important.* Rainwater’s (1966) research on lower-class
Negroes complements the social psychological literature in his sugges-
tion that it is the family and peer group that are the principal sources of
self-identity. He suggests that it is the broken family and the expressive
system of the corner peer group that are the principal causes of low self-
esteem and crises of identity. He goes on to suggest that, except for the
negative definition of black skin, the same processes of identity formation
should take place among lower-class whites who are in similar social and
economic positions. Disregarding the definition of black skin, and as-
suming different sources of relevant evaluation, the application of the
self-through-interaction thesis leads to a different conclusion concerning
the self-esteem of black Americans.

Therefore, to the degree that Negroes do not use biased white evaluators
in developing a self-evaluation, the process of development of self-identity
within the black community will parallel the developmental process in the

8 We have phrased the traditional arguments and our own in group terms. We have
spoken and will speak of Negroes and whites, and have attended to evidence in the
form of relevant group rates. We do not mean to imply that all Negroes, or whites for
that matter, find themselves in similar social circumstances or respond to the same
circumstances in exactly the same manner. We recognize, in fact we insist, that the
variables under discussion are variables. Consequently, when we make the statement
that Negroes are highly likely to use the evaluations of other Negroes as sources of
identity and self-esteem, we would expect a great deal of variation here within the
Negro subgroup depending upon the constellation of other variables such as region,
class, relative size of Negro and white population within a geographic area, and the
like. Consequently, we would predict very different sources of evaluation and conse-
quences for self-esteem for the Negro living in a small North Dakota town working as
a store clerk and his counterpart in Harlem. The same would be true for the black
high school teacher, educated at a state university in the Northeast and teaching in
the Northeast compared with the black individual educated at a predominantly black
state university in the South and teaching at a predominantly black high school in the
rural deep South. After comparing such group rates, of course, the burden of such an
explanation rests upon demonstrating within group differences as the hypothesis, with
respect to social group rates, is certainly consistent with a number of other explana-
tions. While not denying within-group or between-community differences, we stress
racial-group differences here in response to the phrasing of traditional arguments.
Success and Values

Coopersmith (1967) notes that self-evaluations stemming from one’s
experiences are judged as successes or failures depending on one’s values
and aspirations (p. 37). Consequently we cannot infer self-evaluation
directly from an objective reading of success and failure; we must put
such a history into a context of values and aspirations. This point only
becomes relevant when it is not assumed that the American cultural
structure can be characterized by one dominant set of values about
which there is a high degree of consensus.

One can make a distinction between a group of authors who argue
that American society is characterized by a set of common values and a
second group who stress distinct subcultural value systems.

The first group of writers has assumed that society is integrated by a
common system of values and that all members are more or less aware
of and committed to these values. Parsons (1953), for example, assumes
that a common value system underlies the system of stratification. He
writes: ‘Stratification in its valuation aspect, then, is the ranking of units
in a social system in accordance with the standards of the common value
system” (p. 93). Merton’s (1957) statement on anomie articulates this
position with its assumption that most Americans are aware of and
committed to a value system epitomized in the American Dream. Such
a perspective allows one to make direct inferences regarding self-evalua-
tion from an individual’s objective successes and failures.

The second group of theorists has assumed that American society is
composed of a number of autonomous and conflicting subcultures. Per-
haps the strongest statement of this position was made by Miller (1958)
who wrote concerning lower-class culture: ‘There is a substantial segment
of present-day American society whose way of life, values, and character-
istic patterns of behavior are the product of a distinctive cultural system
which might be termed ‘lower class’ ’”’ (see also Davis 1946; Lewis 1961;
Becker 1963). This perspective allows one to argue that the distinct
values developed within the lower class can provide alternative criteria
for success and contribute to positive self-evaluation, hence blunting
middle-class definitions of failure and evaluations of such failure.

It should also be noted that the literature we have been questioning
has assumed that the conflict which has characterized the relationship
between white and black Americans has resulted in disorganization and
® The degree to which blacks employ whites as significant others ought to vary directly

with informal contact with whites. Though such contacts may be selective, it might be
hypothesized that variation in contact is negatively related to self-esteem.
disintegration within the Negro community (Coser 1956; Williams 1947).
We suggest, following the arguments of Lewin (1948), Myrdal (1944,
pp. 1766-67), and more recently Himes (1966), that, on the contrary,
racial conflict and isolation have resulted in a measure of cohesion and
solidarity among Negro Americans. If conflict has had such consequences,
then it should function to sharpen variant value systems. There is some
evidence indicating that Negroes generally, and especially working- and
lower-class Negroes, have developed life-styles that reflect relatively
autonomous and cohesive subcultures (Keil 1966; Billingsley 1968;
Valentine 1968; Hannerez 1969).

Following those who suggest that class is the crucial variable necessary
to isolate such value subcultures, one would predict that the lower class
would be least likely to accept the dominant definitions of success and
worthiness. Recognizing the effects of racial conflict, however, suggests
that lower-class whites should be more vulnerable to dominant defini-
tions than lower-class blacks (see Dahrendorf 1959, pp. 189-93).
Middle-class blacks should be more likely than lower-class blacks to
accept the dominant value system. Following this line of reasoning, we
suggest that middle-class whites should be most highly committed to the
dominant value system and lower-class blacks should be least committed.
We would suggest, then, that the possibilities for variant value sub-
cultures would be greatest among the black lower class!° and smallest
among the white middle class, with the white lower class and the black
middle class falling somewhere between the two extremes.

Tf, in fact, success and failure are translated into self-evaluation within
a context of values and aspirations, and variant subcultures provide
alternative criteria of success and failure, then there are avenues to
credible and high self-esteem that do not depend upon the dominant
value configuration. Lower-class blacks will manifest higher self-esteem
than lower-class whites, and middle-class blacks will manifest lower self-
esteem than middle-class whites.

10 Though we are led to make this argument on theoretical grounds, we are somewhat
skeptical of it on empirical grounds. The research on educational aspirations of black
and white youth indicates that black adolescents are at least as likely and probably
more likely to accept dominant definitions of educational success (see Proshansky and
Newton 1968, pp. 196-202). On the other hand, viewing the above argument in devel-
opmental terms may mean that this evidence does not contradict the position. We
have neglected to confront the developmental aspects of self-evaluation in discussing
racial differences here. In so doing, we do not mean to imply that we do not recognize
the crucial importance of such aspects in developing an explanation of racial differ-
ences in self-evaluation. The traditional literature, under review, stresses the factors
affecting adult self-evaluation; so, too, have we. The more theoretical work on self-
esteem, though, stresses the early adolescent period, suggesting development of a
stable self-evaluation during this period. These two emphases conflict in their inter-
pretation of the implications of the educational aspiration data for social differences
in adult self-evaluation.
Responses to Evaluation

The subcultural explanation comes close to implying that members of sub-
cultures are neither influenced by nor aspire to the values of the dominant
culture. Recent literature describing the poor suggests that the required
structural autonomy for the development of an autonomous subculture
does not exist in an industrial-urban society. That is to say, it is unlikely
for a group of people, no matter how limited their resources, to be totally
unaware of and unaffected by the larger community." By this view,
both the black poor and the white poor encounter the criteria of worth
expressed by more affluent Americans. Rather than asking how such
negative evaluations harm individuals who are subject to them, we ask
how one defends himself in the face of them.

Here we are following Merton (1957), who asks, ‘‘When are relatively
slim life-chances taken by men as a normal and expectable state of
affairs which they attribute to their own personal inadequacies and when
are they seen as the result of an arbitrary social system of mobility, in
which rewards are not proportioned to ability?” (p. 240).

Cloward and Ohlin (1960) argue that persons who ascribe their failure
to the social system attack the system and become alienated from it to
some degree. ‘“The individual who locates the source of his failure in his
own inadequacy, on the other hand, feels pressure to change himself
rather than the system. Suffering from a loss of self-esteem, he must
either develop mechanisms that will protect him from these feelings of
personal inadequacy or work toward eliminating them by developing
greater personal competence. By implication, then, attributing failure
to one’s own faults reveals an attitude supporting the legitimacy of the
existing norms” (p. 112). One response to failure results in negative self-
evaluation or low self-esteem; the second results in a withdrawal of
loyalty from conventional structures and has no apparent affect on self-
esteem.!? Under what structural conditions are persons who fail likely to
respond to such failure by blaming the system rather than themselves?
Cloward and Ohlin suggest two conditions: (1) When there is a “dis-
crepancy between institutionally induced expectations (as distinct from
aspirations) and possibility of achievement, which produces a sense of
unjust deprivation.”’ (2) When there are “highly visible barriers to the
achievement of aspirations, which give rise to feelings of discrimination”.
(p. 113).

The position of the lower- and working-class Negro in America is ob-
viously characterized by these conditions. Thus Myrdal (1944) noted
several decades ago: ‘The standard explanation of Negro failures, and the
only one publicly accepted, is to place the responsibility upon the caste
system and whites who uphold it. . . . As the Negro protest is rising and
is becoming popularized, the view becomes more and more widespread
that white oppression and caste deprivation are to be blamed and not
Negro inferiority” (p. 759). Traditionally, white prejudice and discrimina-
tion have been quite open and have become more subtle as the articula-
tion of the system-blame position has become more widespread. On the
other hand, lower-class whites possess a far less well-articulated view
with which to reinterpret negative evaluations, and barriers to success
for lower-class whites are less visible. Poor white reaction to governmen-
tal efforts made in response to black protest may be the beginnings of
such a coherent view, however (see Brink and Harris 1966). The im-
plications of such a view for self-evaluation of the individual black man
are made explicit by Myrdal (1944), when he says, “It preserves self-
respect and does not necessarily damage ambition” (p. 759).

The system-blame reinterpretation of failure and negative evaluation
should not be as likely an option for the middle-class black, however.
In spite of discrimination he has achieved some measure of success with-
in the dominant value framework. Acceptance of the system-blame per-
spective should be more difficult since it suggests that he could not be
successful if it held (see Rytina, Form, and Pease 1970). Consequent-
ly, we suggest that the system-blame explanation does not function as
well in defending middle-class blacks from negative evaluation. We are
again led to the proposition that lower class blacks should exhibit higher
self-esteem than lower-class whites, but middle-class blacks should exhibit
lower self-esteem than middle-class whites.

In this section we have developed three theoretical perspectives in
contrast to the traditional view. As we have stated above, the burden
of these views rests upon the explanation of within-group differences, as
a number of arguments presented result in similar predictions of racial
differences by class level. Given the ambiguity of the evidence reviewed,
we believe that each of these perspectives ought to be subjected to em-
pirical test.
ideological position. The segregationist might say, ‘You see, segregation
is good for them,” implying that there are also positive consequences of
segregation. The black militant will, no doubt, appreciate our analysis
of the traditional literature as at best stereotyped, and commend our
suggestion that poor blacks respond with strength to oppression.

In either case, the public policy implication of the alternative views of
Negro self-esteem presented here stands in sharp contrast to the tradi-
tional hypotheses of Negro self-hatred and pathology. Valentine (1968)
argues strongly and quite convincingly that academic poverty experts
and liberal intellectuals in general view the cultural adaptations of the
poor, especially the Negro poor, as pathological. The adaptations which
the poor make to their circumstances are viewed from a middle-class
perspective, which easily leads to characterization of these adaptations
as unhealthy, destructive of human potential, and physically damaging
(see also Rodman 1964). The political thrust of such ‘“race’’ research,
then, combined with what appears to be a rather consistent view of the
poor as pathological, may account for the plausibility of the standard
view of Negro self-hatred. It has been politically acceptable to denigrate
the poor, especially the Negro poor, if the burden has been placed upon
the white majority for the hypothesized state of affairs.

Yet, as the controversy surrounding the ‘Moynihan Report’ clearly
indicates, a description that suggests Negroes, or the poor in general,
are pathological, even though plausible given the social and economic
constraints under which they live, implicitly suggests that the problems
that characterize these groups may be attacked, not only on the institu-
tional level, but also on the individual and family level. Martin Luther
King (1967), commenting on the pathologies normally associated with
the Negro family, identifies the political ambiguities inherent in the
traditional position. He writes: ‘As public awareness increases there
will be dangers and opportunities. The opportunities will be to deal fully
rather than haphazardly with the problem as a whole—to see it as a
social catastrophe and to meet it as other disasters are met with an ade-
quacy of resources. The dangers will be that the problem will be attrib-
uted to innate Negro weaknesses and used to justify neglect and ratio-
nalize oppression” (p. 404).

If empirical evidence supports an alternative description and explana-
tion of racial differences in self-esteem, then institutional change rather
than individual psychiatric or welfare services should be the primary
focus of public policy aimed at amelioration of the consequences of racism.
Becker, Howard 8. 1963. Outsiders. New York: Free Press.

Berelson, Bernard, and Gary A. Steiner. 1964. Human Behavior. New York: Harcourt,
Brace & World.

Bettelheim, B. 1943. “Individual and Mass Behavior in Extreme Situations.” Journal
of Abnormal and Social Psychology 38:417-52.

Billingsley, Andrew. 1968. Black Families in White America. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
Prentice-Hall.

Brink, William, and Louis Harris. 1966. Black and White. New York: Simon & Schus-
ter.

Campbell, Donald T. 1957. ‘Factors Relevant to the Validity of Experiments in
Social Settings.”’ Psychological Bulletin 54: 297-312.

Clark, Kenneth B. 1965. Dark Ghetto: Dilemmas of Social Power. New York: Harper &
Row.

Clark, Kenneth B., and Mamie P. Clark. 1958. “Racial Identification and Preference
in Negro Children.” In Readings in Social Psychology, edited by Eleanor E. Mac-
coby et al. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.

Cloward, Richard A., and Lloyd E. Ohlin. 1960. Delinquency and Opportunity. Glen-
coe, Ill.: Free Press.

Coleman, James S. 1964. ‘Implications of the Findings of Alienation.’”’ American
Journal of Sociology 70: 76-78.

Coleman, James S., Ermest Q. Campbell, Carol J. Hobson, James McPartland,
Alexander Mood, Frederic D. Weinfeld, and Robert L. York. 1966. Equality of
Educational Opportunity. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.

Coles, Robert. 1964. Children of Crisis. Boston: Little, Brown.

Coopersmith, Stanley. 1967. The Antecedents of Self-Esteem. San Francisco: Freeman.

Coser, Lewis. 1956. The Functions of Social Conflict. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press.

Dahrendorf, Ralf. 1959. Class and Class Conflict in Industrial Society. Stanford, Calif.:
Stanford University Press.

Davis, Allison. 1946. ‘The Motivation of the Underprivileged Worker.” In Industry
and Society, edited by W. F. Whyte. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Davis, Allison, and John Dollard. 1940. Children of Bondage. New York: Harper &
Row.

Dohrenwend, Bruce P. 1966. ‘‘Social Status and Psychological Disorder: An Issue of
Substance and an Issue of Method.”’ American Sociological Review 31 (February):
14-34.

Dollard, John. 1937. Caste and Class in a Southern Town. Garden City, N.Y.: Double-
day and Anchor Books.

Elkins, Stanley. 1959. Slavery. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Erikson, Erik H. 1966. ‘“‘The Concept of Identity in Race Relations: Notes and
Queries.” Daedalus 95 (Winter) : 145-71.

Frazier, E. Franklin. 1957. Black Bourgeoisie. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press.

Gibbs, Jack P. 1966. “Suicide.” In Contemporary Social Problems, edited by R. K.
Merton and R. A. Nisbet. 2d ed. New York: Harcourt, Brace & World.

Goodman, Mary Ellen. 1952. Race Awareness in Young Children. Cambridge, Mass.:
Wesley.

Gordon, Daniel N. 1965. ‘A Note on Negro Alienation.” American Journal of Sociol-
ogy 70:477-80.

Greenwald, Herbert J., and Don P. Oppenheim. 1968. ‘Reported Magnitude of Self-
Misidentification among Negro Children—Artifact?”’ Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 8:49-52.

Hannerez, Ulf. 1969. ‘The Rhetoric of Soul: Identification in Negro Society.” In
The Making of Black America, edited by August Meier and Elliott Rudwick.
New York: Atheneum.

Hendin, Herbert. 1969. Black Suicide. New York: Basic.

Henry, A. F., and J. F. Short, Jr. 1954. Suicide and Homicide. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press.

Himes, Joseph S. 1966. “The Functions of Racial Conflict.”’ Social Forces 45 (Septem-
ber): 1-10.
Jackson, Elton. 1962. “Status Consistency and Symptoms of Stress.”” American Socio-
logical Review 27 (August): 469-80.

Jaco, E. Gartley. 1960. The Social Epidemiology of Mental Disorders. New York:
Russell Sage Foundation.

Kardiner, Abram, and Lionel Ovesey. 1951. The Mark of Oppression: Explorations in
the Personality of the American Negro. New York: Norton.

Keil, Charles. 1966. Urban Blues. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Kilpatrick, Elizabeth. 1968. “A Psychoanalytic Understanding of Suicide.” In Sui-
cide, edited by Jack P. Gibbs. New York: Harper & Row.

Killian, Lewis M., and Charles M. Grigg. 1962. “Urbanism, Race, and Anomia.”
American Journal of Sociology 67 :661-65.

King, Martin Luther. 1967. “Civil Rights and the Negro Family.” In The Moynihan
Report and the Politics of Controversy, edited by Lee Rainwater and W. L. Yancey.
Cambridge, Mass.: M.1.T. Press.

Kornhauser, Arthur N., Albert J. Mayer, and Harold L. Sheppard. 1956. When Labor
Votes. New York: University Books.

Labovitz, Sanford. 1968. ‘Variation in Suicide Rates.” In Suicide, edited by Jack P.
Gibbs. New York: Harper & Row.

Lewin, Kurt. 1948. Resolving Social Conflicts. New York: Harper & Row.

Lewis, Oscar. 1961. The Children of Sanchez. New York: Random House.

McDill, Edward L., Edmund D. Meyers, Jr., and Leo Rigsby. 1966. Sources of Educa-
tional Climates in High Schools. Department of Social Relations. Baltimore, Md.:
Johns Hopkins University.

Maris, Ronald W. 1969. Social Forces in Urban Suicide. Homewood, Ill.: Dorsey.

Merton, Robert K. 1957. Social Theory and Social Structure. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press.

Middleton, Russell. 1963. ‘Alienation, Race and Education.” American Sociological
Review 28:973-77.

Miller, Walter. 1958. “Lower Class Culture as a Generating Milieu of Gang Delin-
quency.” Journal of Social Issues 8:5-19.

Myrdal, Gunnar. 1944. An American Dilemma. 2 vols. New York: Harper & Row.

Nettler, Gwynn. 1957. “‘A Measure of Alienation.” American Sociological Review 22
(December) : 670-76.

Odum, Howard. 1910. “Social and Mental Traits of the Negro.” Studies in History,
Economics and Public Law 37:551-65.

Parsons, Talcott. 1953. “‘A Revised Analytical Approach to the Theory of Social
Stratification.” In Class, Status and Power, edited by R. Bendix and S. M. Lipset.
New York: Free Press.

Pasamanick, Benjamin, Dean W. Roberts, Paul W. Lemkau, and Dean B. Krueger.
1964. ‘‘A Survey of Mental Disease in Urban Population: Prevalence by Race and
Income.” In Mental Health of the Poor, edited by Frank Reissman et al. New York:
Free Press.

Pettigrew, Thomas F. 1964. A Profile of the Negro American. Princeton, N.J.: Van
Nostrand.

. 1967. “Social Evaluation Theory: Convergences and Evaluations.” Nebraska
Symposium on Motivation, edited by David Levine. Lincoln: University of Ne-
braska Press.

Proshansky, Harold, and Peggy Newton. 1968. “The Nature and Meaning of Negro
Self-Identity.” In Social Class, Race and Psychological Development, edited by
Martin Irvin Katz and Arthur R. Jensen. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.

Radke, Marian J., and Helen G. Trager. 1950. “Children’s Perception of the Social
Roles of Negroes and Whites.” Journal of Psychology 29:3-33.

Rainwater, Lee. 1966. ‘Crucible of Identity; the Negro Lower-Class Family.”
Daedalus 95, no. 1 (Winter): 172-216.

Rodman, Hyman. 1964. ‘“Middle-Class Misconceptions about Lower-Class Families.”
In Blue Collar World, edited by A. B. Shostak and William Gomberg. Englewood
Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

Rohrer, John H., and Munro S. Edmonson. 1960. The Eighth Generation Grows Up.
New York: Harper & Row.
Rose, Arnold. 1948. The Negro in America. New York: Harper & Row.

Rosenberg, Morris. 1965. Society and the Adolescent Self-Image. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press.

Rushing, William A. 1968. ‘Individual Behavior and Suicide.” In Suiczde, edited by
Jack P. Gibbs. New York: Harper & Row.

Rytina, Joan Huber, William H. Form, and John Pease. 1970. “Income and Stratifica-
tion Ideology: Beliefs about the American Opportunity Structure.’ American
Journal of Sociology 75:703-16.

Silberman, Charles E. 1964. Crisis in Black and White. New York: Random House.
Sterne, Muriel W. 1967. ‘Drinking Patterns and Alcoholism among American Ne-
groes.” In Alcoholism, edited by David J. Pittman. New York: Harper & Row.
Suicide in the United States: 1950-1964. 1967. Washington, D.C.: Government Print-

ing Office.

Valentine, Charles A. 1968. Culture and Poverty. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Vanderpool, James A. 1969. “Alcoholism and Self Concept.” Quarterly Journal of
Studies in Alcoholism 30 (March) :59-77.

Williams, Robin. 1947. The Reduction of Intergroup Tensions. SSRC Bulletin no. 57,
New York.
