Cross-national Patterns and Determinants of Female Retirement

Author(s): Fred C. Pampel and Sookja Park

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 91, No. 4 (Tan., 1986), pp. 932-955
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2779963

Accessed: 08-06-2016 03:52 UTC
Despite the importance of labor force status to the well-being of
older women in developing and developed nations, retirement of
females has not been studied cross-nationally. This article first pre-
sents hypotheses concerning the effects of (1) industrial develop-
ment, (2) social security growth, (3) sex stratification, and (4) family
structure and fertility on cross-national patterns of female retire-
ment. It then argues that industrial development interacts with the
variables specified by the other hypotheses in determining female
retirement. Longitudinal, aggregate data for 93 nations in 1960,
1965, and 1970 are used to calculate rates of withdrawal of females
from the labor force during old age and to test the arguments. The
results show substantial female retirement that varies systematically
with the economic and social characteristics of the nations studied.
As predicted, the effects of pensions, family size, and sexual equal-
ity on female retirement increase with the level of industrial devel-
opment. This supports the interpretation that industrial work con-
ditions combine with lowered family duties and greater sexual
equality to increase female retirement. Overall, all the hypotheses
are supported, but it is necessary to consider the different contexts
in which they apply.
ers; the other is the rise in labor force participation of middle-aged
women. Cross-national research on the labor force reflects interest in
these trends: a number of studies show that economic development, age
structure, and public pensions determine male retirement (Cohn 1982;
Pampel and Weiss 1983), whereas other studies show that family struc-
ture, sex stratification, and income inequality determine total female
labor force participation rates (Youssef 1974; Semyonov 1980).

However, little attention has been paid to the way these two trends
intersect to determine the labor force experience of older women. On the
one hand, the increase in participation of middle-aged women has raised
the number eligible for retirement at later ages. The same factors that are
responsible for the increase in retirement among males may cause a simi-
lar increase among eligible females. On the other hand, the trend in
female retirement may involve circumstances not reflected in the trend for
older males. Older women face discrimination on two counts—age and
sex—and may be uniquely affected by old age because of their female
status. As a result, patterns and determinants of female retirement may
not reflect those of other age-sex groups. Overall, it is not clear how much
female retirement has changed around the world and, if it has changed,
what have been the causes.

Despite the importance of labor force status to the well-being of older
women in all nations and the theoretical issues raised by the intersection
of old age and female status, there have been few studies of female
retirement. Most studies of female labor force participation focus on rates
aggregated over all age-groups and mask trends and patterns at older
ages. Other studies of female labor force status during old age have been
limited to analyses of time-series data for the United States (Bowen and
Finegan 1969; Pampel 1981) or of longitudinal samples of individuals
residing in the United States (O’Rand and Henretta 1982; McEaddy
1975). Because variations in development and family and occupational
structure are limited in these studies, they also fail to examine the struc-
tural determinants of retirement. Only Durand’s (1975) study considers
cross-national variation in participation of females at older ages, but his
purposes are descriptive rather than analytic. Hence, the study of a major
change in the labor force patterns of nations throughout the world—the
emergence and growth of retirement—has been limited to men.

The failure to study female retirement is partly a result of measurement
problems. Historical and comparative studies of male retirement have
relied on measures of labor force participation rates for men aged 65 and
over (Pampel and Weiss 1983), assuming that nonparticipants at those
ages are retired. Since many nonparticipating women are lifelong home-
makers, such an assumption is not true for older women. As a result, the
study of aged female labor force participation has not been able to sepa-
rate trends in female retirement from trends in homemaking. In fact, this
participation rate has been nearly constant in the United States over the
past several decades because the increase in female retirees is balanced by
the decrease in lifelong homemakers (Bowen and Finegan 1969).

Our objective in this article is to describe and explain cross-national
variation in retirement of older females. Theoretically, we will compare
the influence of two groups of factors: those that have been shown to
determine male retirement (such as industrial development and public
pensions) and those determinants important for female participation
(such as sex stratification and family structure). Methodologically, this
involves the development of more suitable measures of female retirement.
We will examine models using these determinants and measures for a
group of nations at all levels of economic development in order to provide
a full range of variation in the variables and to allow study of the condi-
tions under which retirement emerges as well as becomes institution-
alized.

At the outset, definitional issues concerning the cross-national study of
female retirement need to be addressed. Retirement is often defined as a
formal role involving reduction of employment accompanied by income
from a retirement pension (Atchley 1982). This definition applies well to
males in advanced industrial societies, but it applies less well to the
retirement of females in industrial countries and males and females in
industrializing countries. Although not strictly retired according to the
above definition, substantial numbers of females in industrial and indus-
trializing countries withdraw from the labor force during old age. For
example, according to the ILO (1977), in India about 59% of the 55-64-
year-old women in the labor force in 1960 had withdrawn by 1970 when
they were between 65 and 74 years old. That figure includes 1.7 million
women—22% of all women over age 65—few of whom receive a formal
pension or occupy a formalized role. Similarly, in the United States, 31%
of women aged 55—64 had withdrawn after age 65, which translates into
4.6 million women or 39% of all older females. Since many of these
women face financial difficulties similar to or greater than more formally
retired males, it is important that they not be ignored in studies of re-
tirement.

In order to study such behavior, we propose to define retirement more
broadly as withdrawal from the labor force during old age. In addition to
being inclusive, this definition allows measurement of female retirement
cross-nationally. By obtaining cohort longitudinal data, we can compare
labor force participation rates during middle age and old age. The differ-
ence between the rates of the two age-groups shows the level of labor
force withdrawal during old age. Furthermore, the difference controls for
trends in participation during middle age and allows the study of re-
tirement independent of trends in homemaking. Consequently, we can
calculate a measure of female retirement without reference to the work
history, pension benefits, and formalized retirement roles of individual
women.

One may object that the definition proposed here and the retirement
measure that stems from it create problems of comparability across differ-
ent economic and structural contexts. Labor force withdrawal may be
forced or voluntary, formal or informal, supported or unsupported by
pensions. Such differences in the nature and meaning of retirement,
which vary systematically with the economic and structural context of a
nation, are not distinguished by our definition or measure.

Because of the limitations in international data, there has been no
direct study of these aspects of retirement cross-nationally—for either
men or women. However, the meaning and nature of retirement can be
studied indirectly by allowing the causal processes that determine female
retirement to vary across the nations studied. For instance, in nations
where much of the labor force is employed in home production, retire-
ment (or labor force withdrawal) is primarily informal; in nations where
much of the labor force is employed in large bureaucratic organizations,
retirement is primarily a formal status change involving mandatory re-
tirement policies and receipt of a pension. Although it is not possible to
measure the “formality” of retirement here, it is possible to take account
of the different nature of retirement in industrial and industrializing na-
tions in the specification of the hypotheses. If the meaning of retirement
varies by the economic and social context, it will show up in different
effects of the determinants in agricultural, industrializing, or advanced
industrial nations. With this in mind, in the next section we specify
different causal processes determining female retirement across levels of
industrial development. Our goal, then, is not to ignore certain types
of informal retirement by using a narrow definition. Rather, we intend
to use a broad definition and to account empirically for the different forms
of retirement subsumed by that definition.

The alternative to this approach is to ignore important behavior in-
volving millions of women across the world. Although we are not able to
study all dimensions of retirement, we can approximate a complex phe-
nomenon by comparing withdrawal behavior across different economic
and social contexts. This is not meant to replace traditional definitions
and approaches to the study of retirement but to complement them so as
to allow study of a heretofore unstudied topic. While the usefulness of this
approach will depend on our empirical results, any effort will be an
improvement in our knowledge of this area.
DETERMINANTS OF FEMALE RETIREMENT

We can specify a number of explanations concerning the determinants of
female retirement. Two stem from theories of industrial development and
growth of social security systems used to explain male retirement. Two
others come from theories of sex stratification and family structure used
to explain labor force participation of women. A fifth, interaction hy-
pothesis, considers the joint effect of factors affecting male retirement and
factors affecting female participation and specifies different models across
levels of development.

An industrial development hypothesis argues that the growth of female
retirement results from the growth of nonagricultural production and
bureaucratic work organizations. This hypothesis treats retirement as the
result of the demand of industrial organizations for a highly educated,
geographically mobile, young labor force (Graebner 1980). Whereas, in
agricultural societies, older persons are perceived as valued and experi-
enced workers, older workers in industrial economies are perceived as
less innovative, less educated, less physically and mentally capable, and
more expensive than younger workers (Cowgill 1974). Hence, older work-
ers face forced retirement and discrimination in the labor markets of
industrialized societies. Thus, the higher a nation’s industrial develop-
ment, the higher the retirement of females.”

A social security hypothesis argues that variation in female retirement
is due to national differences in the strength of public social security and
pension systems.° The strength of the social security system involves the
level of benefits, institutional history, population coverage, and ease of
qualifying for benefits. Where the social security system is weak, financial
support for retirement is limited and workers remain in the labor force.
Where the system is strong, retirement becomes a desired status and early
withdrawal from the labor force is common (Foner and Schwab 1981).
Even though the development of strong pension systems is partly the
result of economic development, the two are independent in important
respects. Developing nations may use social security programs to induce
retirement and in so doing ease unemployment, lower fertility, and speed
industrialization. Similarly, nations at high levels of development vary in
social security benefits and in wage replacement rates (Myles 1984; Schulz
et al. 1974). In short, the more developed the public pension system and
the higher its benefits, the higher the retirement of women.

A sex-stratification hypothesis argues that retirement of females de-
pends on the equality of male and female educational and occupational
opportunities. Specifically, where sexual equality in the labor market is
low, women are concentrated in unskilled, low-paying jobs in the infor-
mal sector (Boserup 1970; Arizpe 1977). Such jobs are unlikely to have
the mandatory retirement rules, pension benefits, or high salaries that
lead to retirement (O’Rand and Henretta 1982). In contrast, men are
located in the bureaucratized formal sector of the economy where manda-
tory retirement and pensions are common (Slavick 1966; Lazear 1979).
Thus, net of other factors, the greater the sexual equality in educational
and occupational opportunities, the higher the retirement of women.

A family-structure hypothesis argues that fertility levels and family size
determine female retirement. In societies where fertility is high and the
family role of women dominates, women who desire work are likely to
face a disrupted labor force career. Having children may delay career
entry (or reentry), reduce pension opportunities and earnings, and limit
the ability of women to retire (O’Rand and Henretta 1982). Moreover,
women who work in high-fertility societies are likely to do so out of
economic necessity (Boserup 1970, p. 144). Given the economic problems
that led to their participation in the first place, these women are unlikely
to be able to afford retirement (Stearns 1980). In low-fertility societies,
women are more likely to enter the labor force and remain there. As a
result, they are more likely to be covered by private and public pensions,
complete tenure requirements for receipt of benefits, accrue high benefits,
and earn higher wages—all of which make it possible for them to better
afford retirement than women with disrupted careers. Thus, where low
fertility leads to higher, continuous participation over the adult and
middle-age years, it also leads to higher retirement during old age.

An alternative prediction concerning the effect of fertility and family
size on female retirement can also be considered. Because there are many
children to support parents during old age, retirement may be more com-
mon in high-fertility societies. However, the contrary predictions about
the effects of family size can be integrated by considering one final hy-
pothesis.

The last hypothesis is that the two variables affecting retirement for
men and women—industrial development and social security system
strength—will interact with the two variables focusing specifically on
females—sexual equality and family structure. The basic idea is that
female retirement will grow only as both industrial development and
sexual equality increase; neither factor is sufficient by itself. For instance,
the existence of industrial conditions or pension programs conducive to
retirement may not cause retirement among females when the educa-
tional, occupational, and family statuses of women limit their participa-
tion in the industrial economy. Similarly, sexual equality by itself will not
cause retirement unless industrial conditions for retirement also exist.
Instead, female retirement will grow only when industrial development
creates conditions for the emergence of retirement (which results in retire-
ment of males), and conditions of sexual equality allow women access to
jobs where retirement is common. In other words, industrial develop-
ment and sexual equality facilitate each other in determining female re-
tirement: the greater the sexual equality, the stronger the response of
female retirement will be to industrial development; or, the higher the
industrial development, the greater the effect of sexual equality will be in
determining the extent of female retirement.

For family size, the effects on female retirement may also vary by level
of development. In less developed nations, large families may be an aid to
retirement because they provide more numerous sources of support dur-
ing old age. In more developed nations, where wealth passes from older
to younger generations (Caldwell 1978), large families disrupt work ca-
reers and inhibit female retirement. Thus, development increases the
negative effect of fertility on retirement.

These interactions predict different models of female retirement for
nations at different levels of industrial development. The predictions are
also justified by arguments concerning changes in the nature and meaning
of retirement within different industrial structures. For nations at low
levels of industrial development, retirement is relatively uncommon but
is, when it occurs, informal and family oriented. Public pensions, dis-
crimination in the formal labor market, or career disruption due to child-
rearing duties are likely to be relatively unimportant in determining this
form of female retirement. For industrial nations, where employment
outside the home dominates, retirement is a more formal role requiring
receipt of a pension, employment in core industries, and an uninterrupted
work career. As a result, the effects of sexual equality, family structure,
and social security system strength are likely to increase with industrial
development. In sum, the interaction hypothesis reflects changes in the
nature and meaning of retirement and addresses problems of comparabil-
ity in studying female retirement in different industrial structures. It also
integrates the scattered hypotheses that exist in the literature by arguing
METHODOLOGY

The above hypotheses make it necessary to examine empirically both the
additive and interactive effects of the structural determinants of female
retirement. To do this, aggregate data for nations at a variety of levels of
development are required. Furthermore, we need to examine the partici-
pation rates of the same cohort at different ages. This step requires panel
data (unless a synthetic cohort can be used to represent actual cohort
experiences). Published figures on age- and sex-specific participation rates
from the International Labour Organisation (ILO) are available for a
large number of nations for every five years from 1950 to 1970. We begin
with the 117 of these nations that had populations over 1 million in 1965
and with three time points—1960, 1965, and 1970. Because data for the
independent variables are seldom available before 1960, we were not able
to use earlier time points in this study. Even for recent time points, the
lack of data for the independent variables limits the number of nations
studied to 93. This still provides a minimum of 279 (93 X 3) cases, which
is sufficiently large for multivariate analysis.
females, especially in the treatment of unpaid agricultural workers (Dixon
1982; Holden 1978).

Given this definition and measurement of labor force participation, one
way to measure retirement is as a withdrawal rate (the change in the rate
of participation from one age-group to the successive age-group as a ratio
to the rate of the first age-group).> However, a problem with the with-
drawal rate—or with any variable based on change scores—is that it is
not completely independent of the initial values used in the calculations
(Bohrnstedt 1968); in this case it means that retirement drop rates depend
partially on the level of participation of women who are entering old age
(e.g., those aged 45-54). An alternative measure that is completely inde-
pendent of the beginning participation level can be constructed from
regression residuals. This alternative measure involves regressing the
participation rate of the older age-group on the participation rate of the
younger age-group and calculating the residual. A positive residual shows
that the participation level of the older age-groups is higher than would
be expected from the level of the beginning age-group and indicates low
retirement. A negative residual indicates rates lower than expected and
high retirement. We multiply this residual by — 1 to obtain a measure in
which high scores indicate high retirement and that is in the same direc-
tion as the drop rate.

Because of its advantages, we focus on this residual retirement mea-
sure. The residual is based on regressions of participation rates of females
aged 65 and older on the rates of females who 20 years earlier were aged
45-54.° Thus, retirement is calculated for 1970 with the use of 1950 data.

Another way to extend the generality of the residual measure of retire-
ment is to use synthetic cohorts (based on cross-sectional age-specific
participation rates). If the age patterns of participation at the older ages
change slowly, the retirement measures for synthetic cohorts (i.e., age-
groups in the same time period) would be similar to those for real cohorts.
Some cohort change in female participation has occurred, but the two
types of measures may be similar enough to justify use of the synthetic
cohorts. Since the synthetic cohort measures use only one time point in
calculation whereas the real cohort measures use two, the synthetic co-
hort measures allow for use of additional data points.

In general, the retirement residual measures have several advantages.
One, they control for differences in participation at the younger ages and
differentiate retirees from homemakers in studying female participation
at the older ages. Whatever the trends in participation of young females
that a nation experiences, they are removed from the retirement measure
in the residualization procedure. Two, measurement problems in partici-
pation are minimized. Women who work as unpaid family helpers are
sometimes not counted in the labor force. The ILO attempts to adjust for
variations in the definitions used by different nations but cannot eliminate
all the discrepancies. Durand (1975), Holden (1978), and Dixon (1982)
demonstrate anomalies in the participation rates for several nations.
However, an advantage of the retirement measures is that they limit the
bias in female participation rates. If the error in counting female partici-
pants is constant across age-groups, our retirement measures are unaf-
fected by the bias.’ If the error exists across time periods, the real cohort
measure is biased, but the synthetic cohort measure is not. Thus, the
comparability of the measures across nations is superior to measures of
levels of female labor force participation. Three, the measures of retire-
ment are appropriate to females in nations at all stages of economic
development. Instead of focusing on receipt of a retirement pension, these
measures of withdrawal during old age apply well to the informal retire-
ment of females and males in both developed and developing nations.

There are also weaknesses in the measures of retirement. One problem
is that the use of an open-ended category, age 65 and over, prevents a
strict cohort interpretation. Rates for females aged 65—74 would be ideal,
but they are not available from the ILO. Fortunately, the participation
rates of females aged 65-69, 70-74, and 75+ reported in Durand (1975)
for a smaller number of nations and time points are correlated above .97
Economic development.—The indicator of industrial development is
energy use per capita (in kilograms of coal equivalents). This measure is
available for a large number of nations, whereas another commonly used
indicator, GNP per capita, is not available for centralized economies. As
is common, energy use is logged to reduce skewness.

Strength of social security system.—We focus on two indicators of
social security strength, both based on the experience of a nation with
social security systems. One is the years since the first public pension or
old-age assistance program, the other is the years since the first social
insurance program. These measures summarize coverage of the popula-
tion and level of benefits as well as institutional strength of the system
(Cutright 1965). In an analysis of social insurance programs for 22 na-
tions, Aaron (1967) shows that years of experience with the program is the
most powerful predictor of benefits and coverage. For a larger number of
nations, Cutright’s analysis indicates that program experience can be
used as a measure of system strength for developing and developed na-
tions. Finally, Pampel (1985) shows that years of program experience is a
better predictor of male retirement than other available measures of pen-
sion system characteristics. We focus on social insurance experience and
pension experience because nonpension social insurance programs for
occupational injury, unemployment, sickness, and family allowance also
provide monetary and in-kind benefits to older retirees and may encour-
age retirement. Because pensions are one type of social insurance scheme,
the two measures are closely related (r = .88), but it is worth examining
the effects of both to check for the sensitivity of the models to different
measures.
Other measures of social security strength are less satisfactory. A mea-
sure of constant pension expenditures per aged person, while correlated at
.78 with pension experience, is available for fewer than 50 nations and is
a weaker predictor of male retirement than system experience (Pampel
1985).

Sex stratification.—We focus on indicators of equality between the
sexes in access to educational and occupational status. One measure is the
ratio of the enrollment rate of females in secondary schools to the enroll-
ment rate of males in secondary schools (a high score indicates equality; a
low score, inequality). Thus, where absolute enrollment rates may mea-
sure economic development, the ratio of females to males is a measure of
equality in educational opportunities.

The second measure is the dissimilarity index of occupational segrega-
tion, which is defined as the percentage of economically active females (or
males) that would have to change occupational classifications for there to
be a distribution of sexes in each occupational category equal to their
proportion in the labor force. Details of the data and calculations are
presented by Boulding et al. (1976). The measure is weakened by the use
of only seven occupational categories and is available for only 65 nations
for one time point.°

Family structure.—A measure that summarizes fertility, family size,
and number of dependent children per mother is the child/woman ratio.
It is calculated as the number of children aged 0-9 divided by the number
of women aged 15—44. The child/woman ratio is correlated .94 with the
total fertility rate, but it is available for more nations (all 93 for all three
time points). Moreover, since the child/ woman ratio reflects fertility over
the past decade rather than the past year, it is a better measure of family
size than the fertility rate.!°
Models and Estimation

The models to be estimated vary depending on whether the dependent
variable is a measure for a real or synthetic cohort. For the real cohort
data, the retirement measures of each time point are partly determined by
withdrawal during preceding decades. The independent variables, as
they affect this process of retirement, need to be lagged. The exact lag
needed is unknown, but since the independent variables are available
from 1960 to 1970, any lag longer than 10 years would eliminate all the
data points. For the synthetic cohort measures, which are based on par-
ticipation rates for one time period, an instantaneous model in which
independent variables at time ¢t determine retirement at time ¢ is rea-
sonable. '!

Using the multiple time points available with the cross-sectional mod-
els, the panels for each time point are combined to allow pooled time-
series cross-sectional analyses. This increases the sample size from N
nations to N X ¢ nation-years and includes both cross-national and longi-
tudinal variation in the dependent and independent variables. Pooling
reduces problems of sample size and multicollinearity common in cross-
national studies and time-series analysis. At the same time, pooling re-
quires that the causal processes be constant across the separate panels.
This requirement, however, is tested later.

The inclusion of longitudinal data introduces dependency among the
sampling units, may lead to serial dependency of the errors, and violates
the assumptions of ordinary least squares (OLS). Without the presence of
a lagged dependent variable, this leads to unbiased but inefficient esti-
mates with inflated ¢-ratios for the coefficients.!2 To deal with serial
dependence, the pooled model can be estimated with a form of modified
generalized least squares (MGLS). The particular form of MGLS to be
RESULTS

In order to display the data used to calculate retirement, in table 1 we
present mean labor force participation rates for women for the age-groups
used in the residual retirement measures. The last two columns present
the means and standard deviations for the cohort and cross-sectional
residual measures themselves. Examining the participation rates first for
all nations and time points combined shows that they are 25 points (or
63%) lower at age 65+ than at ages 45—54.15 Most of the exits occur in the
later years, although there is substantial withdrawal before age 65. In
comparison, the drop in mean male participation rates is from 95.9% at
ages 45-54 to 56.0% at ages 65+, showing a 42% decline in par-
ticipation.

The other rows in table 1 show female participation rates and the
residuals by year and geographic region and demonstrate that our mea-
sures vary meaningfully across time and space. The mean participation
rates show that over time there are increases during middle age and
decreases during old age, resulting in increased retirement. This is re-
flected in the residual measures. As expected, the means for the residual
measures are equal to zero for the total sample of nations and time points
(note that the standard deviations show substantial variation around this
mean). Across time, however, the means show small increases in retire-
ment over time that reflect the changes in participation rates. Table 1 also
shows variation in participation across geographic regions. Because of the
U-shaped relationship between development and female labor force par-
ticipation, rates are highest for middle-aged women in Africa and Europe
(Durand 1975; Pampel and Tanaka 1986). At the older ages, geographic
variation in participation declines and it is difficult to make sense out
of the existing pattern. However, the residual retirement measure does
make intuitive sense: retirement is lowest in Africa and highest in
Europe. The —5.27 figure for Africa indicates that the percentage of
women out of the labor force during old age is lower than would be
expected on the basis of participation during middle age. For Europe, the
percentage out of the labor force is 7.16 points higher than would be
expected. Thus, where participation rates alone fail to make theoretical
sense, the retirement measures behave meaningfully and demonstrate the
existence of systematic variation in female retirement that we will at-
tempt to explain by the models below.

Before we proceed to the analysis of the retirement measures, we pre-
sent descriptive statistics, definitions, and sources for the independent
variables in table 2. All the variables except occupational segregation are
highly correlated with the measures of female retirement and indicate
that female retirement is associated with a number of social and economic
characteristics of nations. Worth noting here is the similarity of the rela-
tionships of the variables to both the cohort and cross-sectional residual
retirement measures. The correlation between the cohort and cross-
sectional measures of .896 indicates that synthetic cohort retirement dif-
fers little from the retirement of the actual cohorts. As a result, the
correlations of the independent variables with both retirement measures
are similar; the coefficients for the cohort measure are generally smaller
but reflect the same patterns of relationships. Because of the high correla-
tion and similarity of relationships, we focus on the cross-sectional mea-
sure that is available for all time periods. ‘*

Table 3 presents a basic model of female retirement, using the cross-
sectional residual retirement measure. The independent variables include
energy use logged, the child/woman ratio, the education sex ratio, and
years of pension experience. !* These variables have the least missing data
and are able to test the hypotheses presented earlier. The number of
nations available for analysis is 93; with three time points, this provides a
sample of 279. The MGLS estimates in the first column show that the
strongest determinant of female retirement is pension experience followed
by energy use. The effects of the child/woman and education ratios are
small and not significant.

These additive results, however, mask different patterns of female
‘aInseaul JUWSINET WOYOO YBIA\ 4
“aINSIUl JUIUIGIIIAI [EUOTIIAS-SSOID YIM *

 

(€861 ad1pof pue s10jAe TZ)
UsWIOM JO YIIG Je II] Jo uoNepedxq

(6261 ZyUIa} pure Jarysusog) sured

-o1d aoueNsUT [eID0s aAY JO Yyoea Jo
UWONNINsUl dduls aduatIadxea seat Jo WINS

(4161 40

~enstulmpy 4LNIag [eII0S) pays
-Ul sem Me] UOIsUed ysIy DUIS sIvaA

(9261 ‘Te 38 Butpmnog) suoyng

-lysip [euoryednos0 afewlay pue apeur
AiOBZayeI-UIABS OJ Xapul APLIETLUNISSIG

(PL6T OdSau-) Saye jo

ayeI ay} 0} O1yeI e Se {T—¢T pase sopeur
9} JO aYVI JUIUT|JOIUS JOoYIS ArepuoraS

(LL61 OTD PS$-ST pede uaw0Mm jo ‘ou
ay) Aq paplarp 6-0 paze suosiad Jo ‘ON

(€861 aoIpof pue 10]Ae JZ) syuateamnba
yeod jo sparpuny ut uonduinsuos AZI0uq

aaanog pue vomuyaq:

Tos”

tLe”

98h

£s0°

T6e"

sor —

oly"

“

$09"

Tor"

vss”

860°

ers”

os’ —

879°

at

Ler

197%

617

$9

617

6L7

617

N

Ser

zos

O12

TST”

cee"

ve

688'T

as

yw Apueyadxa ayy ayewa,y

6°18 “++ gguatiadxe adueinsul [e1I90g

BIZ aouatiadxa uolsuag

we uonesaizas peuoyednd99,

ope ones xas uoneonp|
ae oned uewom /pTtyD

peed octccttesssteeees asn A3i0uq

uray, aqqeieA

 

SHIAVINVA LNAAGNAdaCN] AO NOILINIAIC ANV ‘STANSVAY] LNAWANILAY HLIM SNOLLVIGNAOD ‘SNOLLVIAGG GAVANVLS ‘SNVAJL
£86"

 

 

 

 

. . #%6£0° ne vortesesss (uy) ABlaua x UoIsUag
StL"
~ 7 . 4b9'T ma sresessssssss (up) Blau x uoTyeONpA
189° —
. x61°Z — ue sorts * (up) Adzaua x ueWOM/PTTYD
Ter" oe" Tv0" — 8s9°— or
4881" #%L80° 420° — abl 2° — sexStT" veesresssesssssss ss gguguadxa uorsuag
TILT” 801 Ov0" 6Le°— £10"
99°9 OL T L738" 6LL— wt ore “7+ * o1yed xas uoryeonpy
Toe’ — Ore” £10" 66L° 090° —
x6 DT — xb0°E zoe *8°ST 6bT— an ones uRWOMm /PTTYD,
062° TL2° 181" OSL” 682°
+100" #200" #210" #98°7 weOOT sess (up) ABzaug
6le°— 00°6 — 16°6— est— 606-0 veseeees esses qdgogaquy
ys UInIpeyy MOT SATOBIIIUT 2aAnIppy ATAVIaVvA,
LN3GNadaGNT

 

asp ABU jo Jao] Ag

 

ajdureg 7eI01,

 

SLN@INIAIIOD STOW
retirement at different levels of industrial development. The next column
in table 3 presents an interactive model in which multiplicative terms
represent the effects of energy use logged in facilitating the other vari-
ables. These interactions add significantly to the explained variance, and
all of the interaction terms are significant. !° First, the interaction term for
the child/woman ratio is negative while the additive term is positive. This
shows that for nations with low energy use, large families make retire-
ment more likely, perhaps because additional children are better able to
support their parents. But, as the level of energy use increases, large
family size inhibits retirement, perhaps because children disrupt work
careers and provide little in the way of retirement support. In any case,
the results show that energy use facilitates the negative effect of the child/
woman ratio. Second, the additive effect of the education ratio is not
significant while the interaction term is positive and significant. This is as
predicted by the interaction hypothesis: levels of sex equality have little
effect on retirement at low values of energy use, but they have increasing
positive effects as energy use increases. Third, the pattern of effects for
pension experience is the same as for the education ratio. Strong pension
systems lead to higher retirement only at the higher levels of develop-
ment.!’ Finally, the additive effect of energy use logged remains strong,
indicating that its effect levels off among the most developed nations.
Another way to view these interactions, now that the multiplicative
model has established their existence, is to estimate separate models for
groups of nations at similar levels of industrial development. The interac-
tion effects described in table 3 are more easily interpreted when we can
examine actual coefficients across levels of economic development. Such
modeling also allows us to check for interactions that are not a linear
function of industrial development by dividing nations into three groups,
based on their levels of energy use.!® The cutoff points were chosen to
correspond roughly to those used by the World Bank (1983) to distinguish
low-income, middle-income, and industrial economies and by Delacroix
and Ragin (1981) to distinguish peripheral, semiperipheral, and core
nations.

Comparing unstandardized coefficients across groups in table 3 rein-
forces the previous results. The effect of energy use (no longer logged
because coefficients can vary across levels) is strongest for nations with
the lowest levels of energy use and weakens for nations at higher levels of
energy use. The unstandardized coefficients for the child/ woman ratio are
positive and small for low- and middle-level nations but show a fivefold
increase in size and a reversal in direction for advanced industrial na-
tions. A similar result holds for the education ratio. Its effect is several
times larger in nations with high energy use than in those with low or
medium energy use. None of the education coefficients reaches signifi-
cance, perhaps because the categorization and the lower degrees of free-
dom reduce the power of the tests. Nevertheless, the pattern of effects
combined with significant results in the multiplicative equation clearly
supports the interaction prediction that sexual equality has the largest
effect on retirement in nations where work and home life are most sepa-
rated. Finally, the effect of pension experience also increases steadily with
development and is consistent with the interaction prediction.

In sum, the results in table 3 show that energy use not only has a
positive curvilinear effect on female retirement but also specifies the ef-
fects of the other variables. Pension experience, sexual equality, and
family size have increased effects on female retirement, once sufficiently
high levels of development create conditions conducive to the growth of
retirement. In other words, development has strongest effects on female
retirement when the pension system is strong, family size is small, and
sexual inequality is low. Conditions promoting both retirement and sex-
ual equality are necessary in order for female retirement to increase.

Our final step in the analysis is to do a further check on the sensitivity
of the estimates to different variables and statistical assumptions. With-
out presenting the detailed equations, we can summarize the results using
different variables. First, we substituted social insurance experience for
pension experience. Overall, its effects were smaller than for pension
experience and did not reach significance at .05 for any of the groups of
nations. However, the pattern of effects was similar to that for pension
experience and is consistent with the interaction hypothesis. Thus, the
CONCLUSIONS

In this article, we examine a phenomenon unstudied in the sociological
literature—cross-national patterns of female retirement among nations at
all levels of development. Because there was no established research
tradition in the area, we had to overcome a number of definitional,
theoretical, measurement, and analytical problems. Although our solu-
tions to the problems presented here are by no means final, they do
advance the understanding of a neglected but important issue. Among the
contributions of this article are: first, it identifies the existence of substan-
tial withdrawal of women from the labor force during old age. The rates
of withdrawal are greater than they are for men and occur even in nations
where formal retirement is rare and public pensions weak. Given the
financial and health difficulties associated with old age, this indicates the
existence of a large population at risk of serious problems. More attention
should be paid to this population in future research.

Second, it demonstrates an appropriate measure of retirement (or labor
force withdrawal) for the cross-national study of females. The use of
cohort and cross-sectional residual scores to measure withdrawal from the
labor force controls for patterns of participation during middle age and
distinguishes recent retirees from long-term nonparticipants. Moreover, it
deals with measurement error inherent in the study of cross-national
participation rates.
Third, the article shows that the measures of retirement vary in ex-
pected ways across time, regions, and levels of economic development.
They also respond in theoretically meaningful ways to other structural
characteristics of nations. If there is error in either the conceptualization
or measurement of female retirement, it does not eliminate the predicted
pattern of structural variation. The same is true of measurement difficul-
ties in the independent variables. Since age-specific data on education,
occupation, family duties, and pension benefits are not available cross-
nationally, it was necessary to use proxies that reflect levels of sexual
inequality, family size, and pension system strength for the total popula-
tion. Had better data been available, the effects would no doubt have
been stronger. But even with these limitations, it was possible to identify
a consistent, theoretically meaningful set of determinants of female retire-
ment that explained substantial variance.

Fourth, the study and measurement of retirement for a large heteroge-
neous set of nations provide the opportunity for theoretical development.
The existence of different types of retirement subsumed under the broad
concept of withdrawal suggests that the determinants of retirement may
differ by economic structure as does the meaning of retirement in those
structures. The empirical models demonstrate that, with economic devel-
opment, female retirement becomes more formal. The existence, then, of
a variety of types of retirement experienced by women does not negate the
possibility of studying female retirement worldwide but instead leads to a
further understanding of the phenomena.

Fifth, the article begins to develop a contextual model of retirement.
Theoretical arguments predict, and empirical results affirm, that the
process of female retirement varies by economic and industrial structures.
Additive models that do not consider the joint effect of development and
sexual inequality are not sufficient in themselves to explain female retire-
ment. Contextual models may similarly make a theoretical contribution
to the more general study of female labor force participation. Most studies
of female labor force participation contrast competing explanations of
development and sexual inequality (Youssef 1974; Wilensky 1968; Sem-
yonov 1980), arguing for one theory over another. For female retirement,
however, the theories are not incompatible: industrial development and
the status of women contribute jointly to the labor force position of
women during old age. Additive models and simple one-factor theories of
female labor force participation may need to be revised to consider in-
teractive models and integrated, multifactor theories.

Sixth, the article shows both similarities and differences among the
determinants of male and female retirement. For both genders, industrial
development and public pensions influence retirement. Because husband
and wife retirement decisions are often made jointly, some relationship
REFERENCES

Aaron, H. 1967. “Social Security: International Comparisons.” Pp. 13-48 in Studies
in Income Maintenance, edited by O. Eckstein. Washington, D.C.: Brookings.
Arizpe, L. 1977. “Women in the Informal Labor Sector: The Case of Mexico City.”
Pp. 25-37 in Women and National Development: The Complexities of Change,

edited by E. Boserup. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Atchley, R. C. 1982. “Retirement as a Social Institution.” Annual Review of Sociology
8:263-87.

Bohrnstedt, G. W. 1968. “Observations on the Measurement of Change.” Pp. 113-36
in Sociological Methodology 1969, edited by E. F. Borgatta. San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass.

Bornschier, V., and P. Heintz, eds. 1979. Compendium of Data for World-Systems
Analysis. Zurich: Sociological Institute, University of Zurich.

Bornschier, V., C. Chase-Dunn, and R. Robinson. 1978. “Cross-national Evidence of
the Effects of Foreign Investment and Aid on Economic Growth and Inequality: A
Survey of Findings and a Reanalysis.” American Journal of Sociology 84:651-83.

Boserup, E. 1970. Women’s Role in Economic Development. London: Allen & Unwin.

Boulding, E., S. A. Nuss, D. L. Carson, and M. A. Grenstein. 1976. Handbook of
International Data on Women. New York: Wiley.

Bowen, W. G., and T. A. Finegan. 1969. The Economics of Labor Force Participa-
tion. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Caldwell, J. C. 1978. “A Theory of Fertility: From High Plateau to Destabilization.”
Population and Development Review 9:553-77.

Cohn, R. M. 1982. “Economic Development and Status Change of the Aged.” Ameri-
can Journal of Sociology 87:1150-61.

Cowgill, D. O. 1974. “Aging and Modernization: A Revision of the Theory.” Pp. 123—
46 in Late Life, Communities and Environmental Policy, edited by J. F. Gubrium.
Springfield, Ill.: Thomas.

Cutright, P. 1965. “Political Structure, Economic Development, and National Secu-
rity Programs.” American Journal of Sociology 70:537—48.

Delacroix, J., and C. C. Ragin. 1981. “Structural Blockage: A Cross-national Study of
Economic Dependency, State Efficacy, and Underdevelopment.” American Journal
of Sociology 86:1311—47.

Dixon, R. B. 1982. “Women in Agriculture: Counting the Labor Force in Developing
Countries.” Population and Development Review 8:539-66.

Durand, J. D. 1975. The Labor Force in Economic Development. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press.

Foner, A., and K. Schwab. 1981. Aging and Retirement. Monterey, Calif.: Brooks/
Cole.

Fuller, W. A., and G. E. Battese. 1974. “Estimation of Linear Models with Crossed-
Error Structure.” Journal of Econometrics 2:67-78.
Graebner, W. 1980. A History of Retirement: The Meaning and Function of an
American Institution, 1885-1978. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.

Hannan, M. T., and A. A. Young. 1977. “Estimation in Panel Models: Results on
Pooling Cross-Sections and Time Series.” Pp. 52-83 in Sociological Methodology
1977, edited by D. Heise. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Hanushek, E. A., and J. E. Jackson. 1976. Statistical Methods for Social Scientists.
New York: Academic Press.

Holden, K. C. 1978. “Comparability of Measured Labor Force Participation of Older
Women in Japan and the United States.” Journal of Gerontology 34:422-36.

International Labour Organisation (ILO). 1977. Labor Force Estimates and Projec-
tions. Geneva: International Labour Office.

Lazear, E. P. 1979. “Why Is There Mandatory Retirement?” Journal of Political
Economy 87:1261-84.

McEaddy, B. J. 1975. “Women in the Labor Force: The Later Years.” Monthly Labor
Review 98 (November): 17-35.

Myles, J. 1984. Old Age in the Welfare State: The Political Economy of Public Pen-
sions. Boston: Little, Brown.

O’Rand, A. M., and J. C. Henretta. 1982. “Delayed Career Entry, Industrial Pension
Structure, and Early Retirement in a Cohort of Married Women.” American
Sociological Review 47:365-73.

Pampel, F. C. 1981. Social Change and the Aged: Recent Trends in the United States.
Lexington, Mass.: Lexington.

. 1985. “Determinants of Labor Force Participation Rates of Aged Males in
Developing and Developed Nations, 1965-1975.” In Current Perspectives on Aging
and the Life Cycle, edited by Z. B. Smith. Greenwich, Conn.: JAI.

Pampel, F. C., and K. Tanaka. 1986. “Economic Development and Female Labor
Force Participation: A Reconsideration.” Social Forces (in press).

Pampel, F. C., and J. A. Weiss. 1983. “Economic Development, Pension Policies, and
the Labor Force Participation of Aged Males: A Cross-national, Longitudinal Ap-
proach.” American Journal of Sociology 89:350-72.

Schulz, J., H. Krupp, M. Peschke, E. Selar, and J. Van Steenberge. 1974. Providing
Adequate Retirement Income: Pension Reform in the United States and Abroad.
Hanover, N.H.: New England Press, for Brandeis University.

Semyonov, M. 1980. “The Social Context of Women’s Labor Force Participation: A
Comparative Analysis.” American Journal of Sociology 86:534-50.

Slavick, F. 1966. Compulsory and Flexible Retirement in the American Economy.
Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.

Social Security Administration. 1977. Social Security Programs throughout the World.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.

Stearns, P. N. 1980. “Old Women: Some Historical Observations.” Journal of Family
History 5:44-57.

Taylor, C. L., and D. A. Jodice. 1983. The World Handbook of Political and Social
Indicators III: 1948-1977. Ann Arbor, Mich.: Inter-University Consortium for
Political and Social Research.

United Nations. 1968. Methods of Analyzing Census Data on Economic Activities of
the Population. New York: United Nations.

United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (Unesco). 1974.
Statistical Yearbook. New York: United Nations.

Wilensky, H. L. 1968. “Women’s Work: Economic Growth, Ideology and Social
Structure.” Industrial Relations 7:235-48.

World Bank. 1983. World Bank Development Report. New York: Oxford University
Press.

Youssef, N. H. 1974. Women and Work in Developing Societies. Berkeley: University
of California Press.
