The Economic Sociology of the Transitions from Socialism

Author(s): Neil Fligstein

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 101, No. 4 (Jan., 1996), pp. 1074-1081
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2782240

Accessed: 08-06-2016 04:19 UTC
Victor Nee and David Stark have been studying socialist societies for at
least 10 years. Both have been fortuitously placed to consider the great
and dramatic changes that have occurred in those societies. They have
been producing interesting work that tries to develop theory and, more-
over, have bravely collected data. Yu Xie has come later to this field, but
his work is thoughtful and careful. These papers are solid and important
contributions, not just to the study of societies transitioning from social-
ism, but to political and economic sociology.

I have three purposes in this comment. First, I want to discuss how I
think the papers are incomplete. The papers present clues about what is
happening in these societies, but their results raise as many puzzles as
they answer. Second, I want to consider how these papers generally do
and do not contribute to the dialogue that is ongoing about comparative
capitalisms in economic sociology. I am concerned as to how little the
concerns of the two literatures coincide. Finally, I want to suggest how
these papers show that political and economic sociology and the nas-
cent theory of institutions they imply ought to be more closely linked
with these studies of transitions to capitalism because there are benefits
for all sides.

Victor Nee’s paper is the most explicit in theoretical terms. His basic
argument is that in state socialist societies, rewards were tied to one’s
position in the party. As these societies marketize, rewards will increas-
ingly come from entrepreneurship and investments in human capital (i.e.,
skills that the labor market rewards). In earlier work, Nee (1989) argued
that this process was moving rapidly and the privileged position of party
membership would erode quickly. He now argues that the privileged
position of the politicians will slowly recede. Rewards may still accrue
to a privileged position, but, over time, this will decrease in importance
as market-oriented factors come into play.

1 This comment was prepared while I was a fellow at the Center for Advanced Study
in the Behavioral Sciences supported by a National Science Foundation grant (SBR-
9022192). I would like to thank Doug Guthrie for comments. Address correspondence
to Neil Fligstein, Department of Sociology, University of California, Berkeley, Cali-
fornia 94720.
Nee’s data have several problems. The sample was generated in a
complex way that suggests that it is nonrandom (at least in its largest
area units). It is also the case that Nee studies household income and
then uses individual-level characteristics as predictors. This may account
for why some of the human capital variables have weak effects. Another
big problem is that income from an earlier time point is assessed retro-
spectively. Caution should be used in drawing conclusions to larger popu-
lations. Nevertheless, there exist few alternative data on these issues.

I have no quarrel with Nee’s general interpretation of the results.
There is evidence that people connected with the government continue
to enjoy rewards. There is also evidence that families with entrepreneurs
earn more income. There is little evidence in Nee’s data to support the
assertion that the party members themselves become entrepreneurs. It
appears that in China, there are large rewards attached to remaining a
government employee, at least so far. In terms of changes in family
income from 1983 to 1989, being a government official has some relation
to income changes. Having family members who were entrepreneurs
appears to have affected income changes. This would seem to support
Nee’s assertion that being a government official continued to be impor-
tant to increase economic rewards, but at a declining rate. The most
troubling results for Nee’s perspective are the human capital variables.
Their effects were very small, and in some cases the returns to education
were negative. This does not look like a society that is rapidly marketiz-
ing and producing Western-style labor markets.

There is an up and down side to Nee’s approach to studying this
problem. The upside is that his simple hypothesis is testable, and we can
tell which parts are supported and unsupported. This is to be applauded
in a discipline where it is often hard to tell what the hypothesis is. But,
the down side is that there are several equally plausible stories that offer
us clues about what may be occurring in China.

No matter what Nee asserts, the heavy hand of the state is everywhere
in his numbers. For instance, his division of the data into regions shows
clearly that the Chinese government has divided up the country zones
and created what Nee calls redistributive, corporatist, and laissez-faire
zones. There is a kind of social experimentation that must be fascinating
to understand (it is briefly taken up in Yu Xie and Emily Hannum’s
paper). It appears that this is being done with the intention of raising
people’s incomes by offering them a variety of incentives and new oppor-
tunities to earn income, but not of producing an unfettered Western-style
market. State actors are allowing more than one set of institutions to
accomplish this.

While the economic advantages of people who work for the govern-
ment are being equaled by those who work for themselves, there is no
evidence that the advantage of working for the government is disap-
pearing. One indicator that working for the state is still lucrative is that
these people have not left the government to enter the private sector.
More important, people who are entrepreneurs are dependent on the
state for government contracts, the ability to buy and sell land, to develop
land, to control local product markets, and to gain access to capital.

My basic problem with Nee’s argument is that his model assumes that
there is no social structure in the market part of the economy and that
state actors have lost their control over that part of the economy. Nee
has not proven anything about the relative expansion or decline of the
political power of the cadres and their control over the economy or their
relationship to those who are being given the right to develop the econ-
omy. From what I know, state owned and so-called entrepreneurial firms
are living together in a symbiotic relationship. There is no obvious oppo-
sition between them. In fact, my guess is that China’s new entrepreneurs
know quite a bit about where their privileges come from and they do not
find the political apparatuses or state-sector firms to be a problem, but
an opportunity.

One place where this shows up is that there are few economic advan-
tages for those who, while not entrepreneurs, are selling labor power into
the market. The low returns for human capital question whether China
is building Western-style capitalism. It is not obvious what produces
these results, but let me make some suggestions. First, wage rates may
still be more or less under central control. This implies that classes of
workers with different human capital endowments are not free to ex-
change their labor power to the highest bidder. Second, other labor mar-
ket actors (local party members, unions) are connected to the state and
they are able to control inequality by making arguments about equity.
Third, labor market rules and the difficulty of hiring and firing workers
might restrict the existence of a competitive labor market. My general
point is that understanding labor markets requires understanding their
social structure and Nee’s results point to this as an obvious field of
research.

The paper by Yu Xie and Emily Hannum challenges the core of Victor
Nee’s argument. Using a different data set that focuses only on people
living in the largest cities, Xie and Hannum try to evaluate whether or
not development has increased inequality in cities. They are also inter-
ested in whether or not human capital returns have increased as economic
development proceeds, and if party membership matters for income in-
equality.

There are several ways in which comparing the two China papers is
difficult. Nee’s sample does not include people from the largest cities.
Xie and Hannum use individual income (a better measure) as opposed
to family income. Their measure of political connections is whether a
person is a party member. This seems a lot less salient than Nee’s mea-
sure of political connections—that is, whether a person holds a govern-
ment job. Finally, Nee’s data set measures whether or not a person
was an entrepreneur. Xie and Hannum’s analysis does not break out
entrepreneurs as a separate group.

In spite of these differences, there are two striking similarities in the
results. First, education exerts weak effects on earnings in both analyses.
Second, having a government connection increases income. Xie and Han-
num find little evidence that inequality has increased in their city data,
but differences in the sampling of the data sets may be responsible. They
do not consider inequality due to differences in entrepreneurship. This
is where Nee’s data are stronger.

Xie and Hannum argue that Victor Nee’s perspective has little sup-
port. I disagree. Nee shows that different patterns of economic devel-
opment increase inequality across China. He also shows that having
a position with the state and being an entrepreneur influences income
inequality. Where I agree with Xie and Hannum is that Nee has shifted
his position from his earlier work (Nee 1988) where he argued that the
decline of state actors and the rise of markets would be more rapid than
it appears to be. Xie and Hannum’s strongest argument is that Nee
ignores the major negative result that education has not become more
important in China. They end by suggesting that the reason that China
does not look more Westernized is because it is not following a Western
track. Xie and Hannum call for the need for a more institutional and
political approach to understanding China’s transition, consistent with
my comments on the limits of Nee’s analysis.

Stark’s basic argument is that the reorganization of state property in
Hungary has been controlled by people who have acted on their own to
create new property forms. These actors (and they are never identified
by name or rank) have taken the opportunities in their environments and
acted to create new property institutions. Stark’s assertion is that the
attempt to reduce their uncertainty is what drives them. They do so by
diversifying, redefining, and recombining resources.

I am extremely sympathetic to Stark’s argument. His “actors” do not
have overarching plans, but instead are trying to use whatever resources
they have to keep their firms going. The making of a market economy
in Hungary, from this perspective, is the result of thousands of people
in the formerly state-controlled firms working out their problems of or-
ganizing suppliers and customers in order to produce products.

Using some extremely imaginative data collection, Stark presents a
snapshot of the ownership patterns of the largest Hungarian firms. Priva-
tization has basically meant that firms formerly run from ministries have
been reconstituted as holding companies. They have organized their parts
as companies as well, creating wholly or partially owned companies that
run autonomously. This has created groups of firms that have at their
core some large firms; most remain at least partially owned by the state.
Stark has done a lot of what I think would be useful for Nee to do next:
try to take apart what is actually going on in the real economy.

My main problem with Stark’s argument is the lack of connection
between the politics of privatization, the reorganization of property
rights, and the emergence of an “efficient” capitalist economy in Hun-
gary. I will discuss each connection separately. The evidence is that firms
have reorganized themselves along corporate lines and lines of ownership
have generally followed previous relationships between organizations
where the state still remains the main owner of firms.

A simple explanation for what Stark has observed is found in the politics
of privatization. State actors released formal ministerial control over state
firms by incorporating them, and then encouraging them to establish own-
ership links to their important suppliers and customers. State actors also
(either intentionally or unintentionally) produced a crisis in the system by
trying to enforce hard budget constraints on firms with the predictable con-
sequence of throwing the entire system into financial crisis. It appears that
Stark’s results were not produced by thousands of actors acting to produce
anew world on their own, but instead by actors armed with a pretty clear
set of rules produced by politicians. One could argue that all of this was
precipitated by Western advisors and international organizations who
forced this kind of policy on the Hungarian government. The turbulence
caused by both the shift in ownership patterns and the imposition of hard
budget constraints can be tracked back to this cause.

If my account is right, then much of the story loses its force. Also, the
value of the term “recombinant” property for understanding what is
likely to happen in Hungary is not obvious. As long as the government
continues to own parts of large organizations and the banks, they will
feel compelled to find ways to bail them out in times of crisis. Just because
shareholdings have dispersed does not mean that ultimately the largest
shareholders do not have to deal with the fortunes of the firm. This is
especially true if that shareholder happens to be the state. And even if
the state is not the main owner of firms, there will be political pressure to
help out large, failing firms because of their contribution to employment.

The last part of Stark’s paper concentrates on trying to find out why the
proliferation of ownership patterns might be effective for the firms. This
part of the paper is very speculative and offers little evidence. It is not clear
why property rights would matter to these reorganizations, which are being
driven, not by the mixed ownership patterns, but by firms trying to find
markets in which they can be competitive either locally or internationally.
The problem for these firms is competition, not property rights.

Stark could have considered what “cultural frames” or conceptions of
control (Fligstein 1990) were going to guide a manager’s actions to meet
competition. He has provided a lot of evidence that there are two major
ways in which the economy is being reorganized to deal with competition:
the integration of production around a core technology, and the production
of groups of firms with diversified products. The former tries to organize
firms, their suppliers, and main customers; and latter tries to spread risk.
These strike me as good candidates for more sustained cultural analysis.
Both are strategies to deal with competition. Integrating production con-
trols competitors and secures markets. Diversification is a risk-spreading
device to insure that the firm survives even though some of its pieces will
not prosper (Fligstein 1996). Are these two approaches to the problem of
solving competition in different industries or different size classes of firms?
Which side, if any, do state actors support? This is where the real social
structure between these firms is being played out.

I would like to expand on what I think is the spirit of Xie and Han-
num’s comments in their conclusion. They argue that any view of these
transitions has to be grounded in the current politics and institutions of
these societies. Nee is trying to get away from having to see these factors
as consequential. I think Nee’s attempt is misguided because it is an
empirical question as to whether or not these societies are producing
Western-style markets. Explicitly understanding state actors as well as
their intentions and policies and then studying the consequences in the
social structuring of markets makes much more analytic sense. The at-
tempt to downplay these types of social process makes Nee’s analysis
incomplete. Nee’s strategy of working with a theory garners us empirical
leverage, but there is no reason why China’s income distribution has to
end up like that in the United States. Xie and Hannum are right that
these are political and institutional choices made within societies as much
as market processes that undergird economic growth.

Stark has done exactly what I proposed: he has looked at how political
choices have effects on the organization of markets (in this case, property
rights). I am, however, not convinced that he has shown a distinct causal
role of the reorganization of property rights in the reorganization of Hun-
gary. This is because he has not theorized these institutions and their
links to one another. I agree with Stark’s view that each of these societies
is likely to produce a different kind of capitalism. There are good reasons
to believe that states, existing law, and the actions of political and eco-
nomic elites will promote a unique blend of property rights, governance
structures, and rules of exchange in these societies (Fligstein 1995, 1996).
But I think there is much more analytic leverage that he can get on what
might happen from his careful understanding of the situation.

This takes me to the literatures that are ignored in these papers. Nee
positions his argument in the “new institutionalism” in economics (he
cites North in particular). But little of North’s work is reflected here.
There is no concern with the efficient design of institutions, their political
and cultural production, and how existing institutions shape societal
change, path dependence, and their unintended effects (North 1990). I
see even less of rational choice institutionalism, which focuses on how
political actors undertake to structure economic institutions (Shepsle
1990). This is a huge mistake because it is clear that China’s leaders have
been experimenting with their institutions. Have the designed institutions
produced the intended results, or is Nee right in implying that China’s
leaders are losing control? How would we look for data either way?

The Stark paper focuses on connecting itself to the recent literature in
economic sociology that focuses on comparative capitalisms, particularly
the work on Asian societies. But Stark only draws out one line of that
thought: the fact that Asian firms seem to have unique social structures
that he characterizes as networks. But he ignores the great variation in
those structures and how they work. He also ignores that states have
played interesting and complex roles in the generation of these social
structures (see Hamilton and Biggart 1988; Hadley 1970; Johnson 1980).
Networks operate in many ways and these distinctions need to be made
explicit in order for them to be analytically useful (Granovetter 1994;
Powell and Smith-Doerr 1994).

Stark does not reference the “historical” institutionalism in political
science, which would seem a natural set of allies for his project. This
group of scholars argues that preexisting institutions influence the shape
of what will come next. They see that actors, ideas, and politics are
important to the shape of new institutions (e.g., Steinmo et al. 1994;
March and Olsen 1989). Finally, there is little attempt to connect back
to organizational theory, which actually provides a great deal of support
for Stark’s view that organizational actors reduce uncertainty and try to
make their organizations survive (Scott 1992; Fligstein 1996). His organi-
zational actors try everything they can to get their organizations to sur-
vive to the next period.

There are two great institution-building projects going on in these
societies: state building and market building (Dobbin 1994; Fligstein
1996). These projects cannot be divorced from one another because much
of state building is about market building, both in terms of setting rules
for markets and the state’s role in markets and also deciding how societies
will respond to markets in fields like social policy. This period in the
former socialist societies is like the 1880-1920 era for the advanced
REFERENCES

Alt, James, and Kenneth Shepsle, eds. 1990. Perspectives on Positive Political Econ-
omy. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Dobbin, Frank. 1994. Forging Industrial Policy. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Univer-
sity Press.

Fligstein, Neil. 1990. Transformation of Corporate Control. Cambridge, Mass.: Har-
vard University Press.

. 1995. “Theoretical and Comparative Perspectives on Corporate Organiza-

tion.” Annual Review of Sociology 21:21—43.

. 1996. “Markets as Politics.” American Sociological Review, in press.

Granovetter, Mark. 1994. “Business Groups.” Pp. 453-75 in The Handbook of Eco-
nomic Sociology, edited by Neil Smelser and Richard Swedberg. New York: Russell
Sage.

Hadley, Eleanor M. 1970. Antitrust in Japan. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
Press.

Hamilton, Gary, and Nicole Woolsey Biggart. 1988. “Market Culture and Authority:
A Comparative Analysis of Management and Organization in the Far East.” Ameri-
can Journal of Sociology 94:S52-S94.

March, James G., and Johan P. Olsen. 1989. Rediscovering Institutions: The Organi-
zational Basis of Politics. New York: Free Press.

Nee, Victor. 1989. “A Theory of Market Transition: From Redistribution to Markets
in State Socialism.” American Sociological Review 54:663—81.

North, Douglass. 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Perfor-
mance. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Powell, Walter, and Laurel Smith-Doerr. 1994. “Networks and Economic Life.” Pp.
368-402 in The Handbook of Economic Sociology, edited by Neil Smelser and
Richard Swedberg. New York: Russell Sage.

Scott, W. Richard. 1992. Organizations: Rational, Natural, and Open Systems. Engle-
wood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall.

Steinmo, Sven, Kathleen Ann Thelen, and Frank Longstreth. 1992. Structuring Poli-
tics: Historical Institutionalism in Comparative Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Williamson, Oliver. 1975. Markets and Hierarchies.New York: Free Press.
