Talcott Parsons and the Theory of Action. I. The Structure of the Kantian Core
Author(s): Richard Munch

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 86, No. 4 (Jan., 1981), pp. 709-739
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2778340

Accessed: 08-06-2016 03:31 UTC
This essay presents the thesis that a correct understanding of Talcott
Parsons’s writings must begin from the assumption of a fundamental
congruence of basic structure and method between the theory of ac-
tion and Kant’s critical philosophy. It is already generally under-
stood that this congruence holds true on the metalevel of epistemolog-
ical assumptions. It is less understood that the Kantian form of argu-
ment penetrates down to the level of the object theory of the general
theory of action. The core of action theory is the notion that concrete
action is to be explained as a result of the inner laws and the char-
acteristic interrelations of analytically distinct subsystems of action.
Thus the Parsonian solution to the central problem of social order
is not “utilitarian”; nor, however, is it in any simple sense “norma-
tive,’ as it is often taken to be. Parsons’s solution lies instead in
the notion of the “interpenetration” of distinct subsystems of action.
This notion of interpenetration is a derivative of Kantian transcen-
dental philosophy. In this sense, a Kantian “core” structures the
theoretical framework of the general theory of action, and Parsons’s
theoretical development must be understood as a progressive elabora-
tion and refinement of this central core.
philosophical position clearly underlies both Durkheim’s and
Weber’s treatment of the moral component of societies, espe-
cially modern societies. [PARSONS 1978, pp. 370-71]

For the past four decades, no sociologist has been able to escape the in-
fluence of the work of Talcott Parsons. This work, awesome in its scope,
depth, and continuity, began with Parsons’s dissertation at Heidelberg on
the concept of capitalism in the writings of Max Weber and Werner
Sombart.? Several essays on Alfred Marshall (Parsons 1931, 1932) and
Vilfredo Pareto (Parsons 1936, [1933] 1968) extended these early studies.
A first culmination point in his theoretical development was reached with
The Structure of Social Action ([1937] 1968), a book which has become
a classic in its own right through its constructive interpretation of the
classic authors. The remaining stages of Parsons’s development are likewise
marked by major publications, the last of which is the collection Action
Theory and the Human Condition (1978a). It has become an obligation
for every sociologist, not only those working directly on theoretical ques-
tions but also all those engaged in the various fields of practical applica-
tion, to take into consideration Parsons’s work—however complete or
incomplete, correct or incorrect, it may turn out to be.

Although Parsons’s sociology has become in this sense an institution,
it is equally true that the conventional attitude toward his theory is one
of critical aloofness. Sociologists do not like to be identified with his op-
timistic judgments on modern American society, or with the label of “con-
servatism” which Dahrendorf (1955, 1958), C. Wright Mills (1959),
Gouldner (1971), and many other critics have affixed to his sociology.®
In addition, the complicated model building in Parsons’s sociology causes
many sociologists to keep their distance from it.4 Certainly only a few
sociologists have taken the trouble to follow Parsons’s elaborate technical
manipulations of his theory through his numerous works. Outside a narrow
circle of disciples, the potential of his work has barely been tapped. Fre-
quently, the argument that his theoretical apparatus can only produce
reifications and so blocks any access to reality has been used to avoid
having to undertake the difficult task of testing systematically the ade-
quacy of the theory’s application to the world. One can use such system-
atic and thorough testing to exhibit the range and limits of a theory,
but only if one is willing to go beyond wholesale criticisms.

The question how much explanatory power a theory as elaborated as
Parsons’s possesses is not one which can be decided by general arguments
or global judgments. After all, Parsons himself demonstrated more than
sufficiently how rewarding such a testing of the explanatory power of his
theory can be. Not the least part of this demonstration is the very range
of his work, from general theory construction down to the analyses, fre-
quently in occasional pieces, of concrete empirical-practical problems.
What one comes to realize is that it is exactly this joining of opposites—of
general theory development with empirical-practical analysis—which makes
Parsons’s sociology so fruitful. It makes possible that interpenetration
of theory and experience, of logic and practice, which is such a crucial
prerequisite for the development of every modern science. In an auto-
biographical article, Parsons points out this twofold character of his so-
ciological work and emphasizes that his kind of theory building is neither
logically deductive nor sheerly inductive, but rather resembles the con-
tinual process of the systematization of the law which one finds in Com-
mon Law jurisdictions:

In this process [ie., Parsons’s theoretical development] ... , I have
indeed reacted to quite a number of externally presented stimuli of the
sort that I have characterized, especially requests to write on topics sug-
gested by others. In a sufficient proportion of such cases, I hope I have
reacted somewhat in the manner of a competent common-law appellate
judge: namely, that I have considered the submitted topics and problems
in relation to a theoretical scheme, which—though its premises were not
defined with complete precision and henceforth assumed as fully given
in a logically complete sense—has had considerable clarity, consistency,
We could describe this procedure as a specific form of the interpenetra-
tion of two subsystems of the production of knowledge which are them-
selves subject to their own laws: the subsystem of theoretical research
and the subsystem of practical problem solving. In saying this we apply
the central concept of Parsons’s theory to his own sociological work. Only
by developing such zones of interpenetration is it possible to synthesize
the results of differentiated subsystems into a unified whole which would
possess its own specific character and which would have more power to
illuminate the world than either an undifferentiated unity or the sum of
the particular subsystems themselves. Here it is theory without intuitions
which remains empty, while intuitions without theory are blind.

The significance of this interpenetration of concept and intuition, of
theory and experience, as a condition of modern science is nowhere made
clearer than in Immanuel Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason ([1781] 19565).
Among philosophers, it is Kant above all who articulates the specific
epistemological structure of modern scientific knowledge, and Talcott Par-
sons’s sociology is everywhere permeated with the structure of the philos-
ophy of Kant. It is not only the aforementioned interpenetration of theory
construction and empirical analysis in Parsons’s concrete sociological work
which leads us to this conclusion. His general theory of action and his
theory of social systems are themselves thoroughly Kantian. If we look
at Parsons’s biography with this connection in mind, we notice that Par-
sons began to read Kant’s philosophy intensively while studying at Hei-
delberg in 1925-26. In his autobiographical essay of 1970, Parsons de-
scribes his experience:

In retrospect it seems to me that this experience was, even apart from
the substantive importance of Kant for my problems, especially important
training for my later work. It was reinforced by a seminar and oral exam
on the same book under Karl Jaspers at Heidelberg in 1926. The im-
portance lay in the fact that I undertook the detailed and repeated study
of a great book, the product of a great mind, to a point of reaching a
certain level of appreciation of the nature of its contribution, and not
being satisfied with the myriad of current rather superficial comments
about it. This experience stood me in good stead in working with the con-
tributions of my own authors and coming to what I felt to be a high
level of understanding of them in the face of many distorted interpreta-
5 Studies on this topic exist, but they remain preliminary and fail to construct a com-
plete interpretive framework. A direct connection between the cognitive theories of
Kant and Parsons has been asserted by H. J. Bershady (1973), who in my view,
however, fails to grasp the essential nature of the correspondence. Bershady draws
a parallel between Parsons’s “action frame of reference” of 1937—conditions, means,
ends, and norms as a priori categories of every social science—and Kant’s categories
of the understanding, and he concentrates on the critical assessment of the claim that
causal explanation according to the covering law model is possible only if it is based
upon this frame of reference. Bershady does not see any continuous development of
content in Parsons’s elaborations of his theory after 1937; he sees them instead as
related attempts to satisfy the conditions of generalization and causal explanation
with one theoretical framework after another. In this, he is hampered by an overly
narrow, purely functionalist interpretation of the action frame of reference, reducing
Parsonian theory to an attempt to formulate necessary conditions for the existence
or evolutionary development of social systems, an attempt which is forced to settle
for functionalist explanations as a second-best solution, strict causal explanation always
seeming to be out of reach. Also unsatisfactory is the quasi-teleological solution to
the dilemma of causal explanation vs. ideography which Bershady, following V.
Wright, puts forth. This is nothing but a relapse into historicism which sacrifices
Parsons’s greatest achievement, namely, the constitution of sociology as a discipline
which is not forced to understand itself in terms of either the models of strict causal
explanation of the natural sciences or the pure ideographic methods of the study of
the arts and other cultural products. In order to understand Parsons’s basic perspec-
tive, we must draw a parallel, not between the action frame of reference and the
categories of the understanding, but between the action frame of reference and the
structure and purpose of Kant’s critical project as a whole, concentrating on the
interpenetration between the categories of the understanding and sense data, between
the categorical imperative and hypothetical imperatives, between the teleological prin-
ciple and concrete judgments. Only thus will we illuminate the interpenetration of
the normative and the conditional in the theory of action. On this topic, see Schwanen-
berg 1970, 1971.
THE INTERPRETIVE PERSPECTIVE: KANT’S CRITICAL PHILOSOPHY

In his last theoretical publication, “A Paradigm of the Human Condition,”
Parsons, fresh from a renewed, intensive study of Kant, enlarges on the
significance of Kant’s transcendental arguments for his own theory of
action.® Parsons shows special interest in Kant’s dualistic construal of
the nature of reality:

Kant clearly thought in terms of dual levels: the categories of understand-
ing and the sense data of empirical knowledge; the “categorical impera-
tive” and the “problems” of practical ethics; the canons of judgment and
esthetic “experience.” There seems to be a striking parallel between his
version of duality and the linguist’s “deep structures” and “surface struc-
tures,” the biologist’s “genotypes” and “phenotypes,” the cyberneticist’s
“high on information” and “high on energy,” and indeed the sociologist’s
“values,” or institutional patterns, and “interests.” We therefore suggest
that the first term in each of these pairs be used to designate a metastruc-
ture, which is not as such a property of the phenomena (also Kant’s
term) under consideration but is rather an @ priori set of conditions with-
out which the phenomena in question could not be conceived in an orderly
manner. [1978¢, pp. 355-56]?
is precisely that this is mere belief, not knowledge ([1748] 1902, pp. 20-
45).

The attempt to construct a completely consistent empiricism had led
Hume to doubt the possibility of scientific knowledge. Kant, on the other
hand, began from a completely different conception of the nature of sci-
ence. For him, the validity of scientific knowledge was a given, a fact.
His question was, How can we explain how such knowledge is possible?®
His explanation took the form of a “transcendental argument,” by means
of which he demonstrated that the possibility of scientific knowledge
having universal validity for all men depends on the existence of certain
preconditions. An important component of Kant’s argument here is the
distinction between the specific capacities of a priori categories and of
empirical sense experience. It is impossible fully to understand the nature
of scientific knowledge by reference either to the order embodied in its
abstract principles or to its empirical content alone. For Kant, modern
scientific knowledge is explainable neither as a habitual generalization
from empirical experience, as in Hume’s empiricism, nor as a series of
deductions from the first principles of reason, as in the rationalism of
someone like Descartes, but only as the mutual interaction of theory and
experience. Experience that can become the touchstone of universal laws
is itself only made possible by a table of categories and a set of general
theoretical principles, which analytically order our sense perceptions. And
it is only insofar as we constantly refer sense perceptions to these cate-
gories and principles that we are entitled to say of them that they express
empirical and not merely logical regularities.

This connection of opposites—the abstract and the empirical—is a spe-
cific historical occurrence whose product is modern Western science. The
prototype of this interpenetration of theory and experience is the rational
experiment, developed in a historical situation in which conditions were
especially favorable to the interpenetration of spheres normally kept sep-
arate. These conditions were provided primarily by the scientific associa-
tions of the Italian Renaissance of the 15th and 16th centuries and the
English scientistic movement of the 17th century. These associations united
intellectuals with practical men of varying backgrounds—artists, engineers,
artisans, merchants, politicians. Their collaboration produced what is by
us today considered a matter of course: the interpenetration of theory and
experience, of logic and practice, in modern science. Thus there were
united for the first time functions performed previously by wholly separate
intellectual classes.®

Just as the Critique of Pure Reason is directed against empiricism in
epistemology, Kant’s Critique of Judgment is an attack on all attempts
to construct a theory of aesthetic judgment by generalization from the
collection of given individual judgments. A theory of judgment can claim
universal validity only if it establishes a connection between a priori
categories of judgment (such as the category of “purposiveness as such”)
and the sensations of pleasure experienced by individuals as they con-
template works of art or the processes of nature ([1799] 1968, pp. 22,
61-68). And the same logic, the logic of the transcendental argument,
structures Kant’s Critique of Practical Reason. The latter work is par-
ticularly significant for us, because in it we can discern the main outlines
of Parsons’s theory of action.

In the Critique of Practical Reason ([1797] 1967), Kant argues against
any attempt to found moral principles on the subjective considerations of
utility of individual actors. That is, he rejects all utilitarian moral theories.
Just as we cannot account for the objective necessity of causal laws by
reference solely to the content of sense perceptions, so we cannot derive
the necessity of a moral law valid for all men at all times from the desires
—or the calculations of utility—of individuals. Private calculations of
utility may yield different results for different individuals, or for the same
individual at different times. The criterion of a moral law, however, is
that it is binding for all men at all times. We cannot explain the obligatory
force of the moral law as the sum of all calculations of utility, because
these calculations would yield extremely variable results, and we would
have made no progress toward a concept of true obligation: “The principle
of happiness can indeed give maxims, but never maxims which are com-
petent to be laws of the will, even if universal happiness were made the
object. For, since the knowledge of this rests on mere data of experience,
as each judgment concerning it depends very much on the very changeable
opinion of each person, it can give general but never universal rules; that
is, the rules it gives will on the average be most often the right ones for
the purpose, but they will not be rules which must hold always and neces-
sarily. Consequently, no practical laws can be based on this principle”
(Kant 1956a, p. 37).

The characteristic of moral norms is that they lay claim to a validity
which is independent of subjective considerations of utility. Our obedience
to them is not based on inclination, which is variable, but on duty, which
is unchanging. As a philosopher, Kant makes no attempt to provide a
sociological analysis of how this sense of duty arises, empirically, in men.
His inquiry is directed toward the question, What are the conditions of
possibility of a universally binding moral law? Once again, Kant demon-
strates that the phenomenon in question is possible only through the link-
ing of abstract categories and empirical ethical problems. Any particular
rule of action can be adjudged valid to the extent that it enables us to
attain a given end, but there is no direct path from this “hypothetical”
validity to a universal, unconditional validity, since our first particular
rule might be called into question by other particular rules which function
as means to other given ends. To bring order to the multitude of particular
rules and to answer the question of their universal validity, we cannot
begin from below, but must apply a scheme of categories from above.
For Kant, order is produced by a ‘categorical imperative”: ‘So act that
the maxim of your will could always hold at the same time as a principle
establishing universal law” (Kant 1956a, p. 30).

Insofar as moral theory takes the categorical imperative as “the su-
preme principle of morality,” it can impose on the multiplicity of par-
ticular rules a unifying order which allows us to judge the universal
validity of these rules. In this way, the development of a universal moral
order is a consequence of the interpenetration of the two parameters along
which human action can be judged: (1) the laws of abstraction and of
logical consistency and (2) the rules of mutual accommodation and of the
satisfaction of needs and desires. A moral order must be in some way a
reconciliation of the demands of abstraction and of logic and the needs
of practical action. If these are kept separate, the former will generate
only empty conceptual systems, while the latter will leave us with a mul-
tiplicity of particularized rules of action, each pertaining to a narrowly
delimited sphere of human activity, containing no potential for a com-
prehensive morality.

We know from the comparative studies of Max Weber that it is not a
foregone conclusion for any given culture that this interpenetration will
occur. A systematic conception of natural law has been developed only
in the Occident; in China, as well as in India, the conditions of interpene-
tration of abstract moral theory and practical regulation essential to such
a development were lacking. In both places the two spheres have remained
separate and isolated from one another.!°

Accordingly, Kant’s philosophy articulates the presuppositions of mod-
ern Western society in both the theory of knowledge and the theory of
morality. And it is precisely because it has this characteristic that Kant’s
THE CRYSTALLIZATION OF THE THEORY OF ACTION AS A THEORY
OF INTERPENETRATION: THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIAL ACTION

The significance of Kant’s transcendental arguments as a key to the un-
derstanding of his own action theory, from its inception in The Structure
of Social Action ([1937] 1968), was openly acknowledged by Parsons at
the other end of his career, in “A Paradigm of the Human Condition”
(1978c). There Parsons regards Kant as providing the hinge for the turn
from a “positivistic” to a “voluntaristic” theory of action. Kant is there-
fore a forerunner of Durkheim and Weber, who are read by Parsons in
The Structure of Social Action as the founders, along with Pareto and
Marshall, of a nonutilitarian, voluntaristic theory of action. “This position
of Kant’s is clearly of central importance to the general theory of action.
We hold that it is the locus of the most fundamental underlying premises.
or assumptions of social ordering at the human level. It should explicitly
be defined not as the data of moral problems but as the transcendental
normative conditions of the ordering of such data. This Kantian philo-
sophical position clearly underlies both Durkheim’s and Weber’s treatment
of the moral component of societies, especially modern societies” (Parsons
1978c, pp. 370-71).

In order fully to appreciate the thrust of Parsons’s argument, we have
to read The Structure of Social Action as the sociological equivalent of
Kant’s moral philosophy. Only in this way will we be able to understand
how this first major work opens out into the theory of action in general
and the theory of social systems in particular. Just as Kant developed
his theory of action as an alternative to philosophical utilitarianism, Par-
sons developed his theory of action as an alternative to sociological utilitar-
ianism. This alternative Parsons terms “voluntaristic action theory,” the
basic principles of which he finds adumbrated in the writings of Marshall,
Pareto, Durkheim, and Weber.

A central reference point here is Hobbes’s ([1651] 1966) formulation
of the problem of social order. A “social order” can be said to exist to the
extent that individual actors are connected by a system of shared behavior
patterns on the basis of which they can form rational expectations about
each other’s actions. For example, if someone wants to make use of a
pasture, he must be able to determine whether there are any other potential
users of this pasture who might claim the same right to use it. If he cannot
determine this, his use of the pasture is in principle not secure. At any
time, a shortage of pasturage might cause others to dispute his right to
use this pasture. He can successfully realize in action his aims and inten-
tions only if he is able to defend himself against the attacks of others,
and he can do the latter only if he has sufficient power. So it must be the
goal of every actor to gain power over his fellows. The war of all against
all is the inevitable consequence. But this state of war, in which every
man must fear every other man, is an intolerable life for men. As Hobbes
shows, in this situation—as in the so-called prisoner’s dilemma—the most
rational actions that men can perform on the basis of their individual,
subjective calculations of utility result in their being far worse off than
if all had accepted some appropriate distribution of rights.1?

As Parsons points out ([1937] 1968, pp. 89-94), Hobbes expresses in
paradigmatic form the dilemma of utilitarian social theories. If the aims
of actions are completely arbitrary and if rationality is the only criterion
for the selection of the means to those ends, then within a system in
which resources are limited and actors act wholly independently of each
other, subjective rationality in fact produces irrational consequences for
every actor. Looking at this system from the outside, we can easily con-
clude that all the actors would obtain more satisfactory results if there
were a distribution of rights and duties and if everyone could count on
everyone else’s observance of these rights and duties. In other words,
there ought to be a normative order within the system. The utilitarian
dilemma consists in the fact that within the system there is no motivation
for the actors to try to alter their self-destructive situation. The most
rational strategy is still the acquisition of superior power; the acceptance
of a normative order requires the confidence that others too will stick
to the norms. This in turn requires that everyone treat adherence to the
norms not as one end among others, but as a higher end which is never
submitted to the conditions of utility calculation. Thus we must give up
the utilitarian premise that there are no necessarily permanent ends; the
free calculation of utility requires precisely that the rank ordering of
ends be allowed to change as the consequences we expect to follow from
their realization change. (And this means that utilitarian calculation can
choose among ends only by evaluating them as if they were means.) If
12 Cf. Buchanan 1975, esp. p. 27. Buchanan, in strict conformity with utilitarian
theory, attempts to explain “how ‘law,’ ‘the rules of property,’ ‘rules for behavior,’
might emerge from the non-idealistic, self-interested behavior of men” (Buchanan
1975, p. 43), and he ends up, as might be expected, right in the snares of the Hobbes-

ian dilemma: where “private sanctioning” no longer guarantees order, centralized
sanctioning has to take over.
the adherence to a norm is to function as a permanent high priority end,
it must constitute the limit of the process of the calculation of utility;
in other words, it must be ranked so high that it is never subjected to
competition from other ends. So long as this condition is not satisfied,
everyone is more likely to trust to his own resources of strength than
he is to count on the adherence of others to the norms which define in-
dividual rights.

If we stay within the framework of a consistent utilitarianism, there
is no way out of this dilemma. Hobbes’s own solution postulates that the
actors, taking the position of observers of their own situation, would realize
that it is more useful for them to adhere to a common order. When the
need for security becomes an end with a high enough priority, the actors
will supposedly be ready to come to an agreement with one another and
to transfer all of their power to a sovereign ruler (Hobbes [1651] 1966,
chap. 17). But Hobbes’s solution is inconsistent; it is not at all rational
for the individual actor to make such an agreement: “This solution really
involves stretching, at a critical point, the conception of rationality beyond
its scope in the rest of the theory, to a point where the actors come to
realize the situation as a whole instead of pursuing their own ends in terms
of their immediate situation, and then take the action necessary to elim-
inate force and fraud and, purchasing [sic] security at the sacrifice of the
advantages to be gained by their future employment” (Parsons [1937]
1968, p. 93).

As long as the individual cannot rely completely on the fidelity of others
to their mutual contract, it is not rational for him to enter into such a
contract. And he can never trust in the fidelity of others unless such
fidelity is no longer the object of utility calculations. This requires, how-
ever, a normative limitation of the principle of utility binding for all
actors; otherwise it will be safer to rely on “force and fraud” as a means
of protection against the predations of others. Such a normative limita-
tion on the principle of utility would have to precede the agreement of
the actors in the system to resign power resources; it could never be the
result of such an agreement. Hobbes of course realized this, which is why
he withholds from the citizens the right to cancel their contract so long
as the sovereign can guarantee order.

Thus it is not calculation of utility which motivates the citizens’ ad-
herence to the contract, since in regard to the contract we have the same
distrust as everywhere else in the state of nature (Hobbes [1651] 1966,
chaps. 14 and 15). According to Hobbes, only the threat of external sanc-
tions can assure the citizens’ conformity to social norms. Order comes not
from a contract spontaneously arrived at, but from a centralized authority.
Hobbes thus provides a solution to the utilitarian dilemma which has
become the traditional utilitarian response to the fact that a free play of
individual interests does not spontaneously yield social order. The solution
turns on the idea of the centralization of decision-making power and the
power to enforce sanctions. Essentially the same solution is offered in the
model of “collective resources” which James Coleman (1974a; see also
1971, 19745) has advanced as a way of dealing with cases in which social
exchange by itself proves unable to generate social order. The same can
be said for the work of Viktor Vanberg (1978), who like Coleman is a
modern utilitarian. The only alternative Vanberg is able to imagine to the
formation of order out of a process of free exchange is the centralization
of decision-making power. Collective obedience to a norm is simply stip-
ulated by a central authority and imposed through the threat of force.
The tensions inherent within the utilitarian solution can be seen in the
fact that we are no longer talking about “norms,” but only about cen-
tralized or decentralized “decisions.” In fact, Vanberg tends to use the
terms “central decision,” “common decision,” and “social decision” as at
least functional equivalents (Vanberg 1978, p. 671).

What does motivate individuals to accept a centralization of decision-
making power? In the various utilitarian models, the motivation can only
be the fear of a superior ability to impose sanctions, since the possibility
of a spontaneous acceptance generated by a free play of interests has
already been ruled out. This implies that a rational agent should want
to obtain this superior power to impose sanctions himself. So we have
landed back where we started, with Hobbes’s war of all against all. A
society can be expected to possess a stable order only if it contains a
sufficiently pronounced hierarchy of power. But even this would be‘a very
fragile order, endangered by every change in the availability of the re-
sources of power. Thus the appeal to centralization of power is in the
end no solution to the utilitarian dilemma, because it fails to touch the
core of the problem: the need to limit the possible ends and means that
individual actors may choose. “A purely utilitarian society is chaotic and
unstable, because in the absence of limitations on the use of means, par-
ticularly force and fraud, it must, in the nature of the case, resolve itself
into an unlimited struggle for power” (Parsons [1937] 1968, pp. 93-94).
Simple centralization of power will be nothing more than a stage in the
struggle for power unless it can found itself on some limitation on the
usage of power other than the mere existence of a sufficiently hierarchized
distribution of power within the society.

This is the argument on the basis of which Parsons maintains that
within the system of utilitarian thought no solution to the Hobbesian
problem of order is possible. If the human condition contained only those
elements recognized by utilitarianism, there would be no social order. Like
Kant in his criticism of skepticism, Parsons begins his own argument with
the claim that social order does exist, even if in an always incompletely
realized form, and that our task should be to try to explain how this is
possible. Parsons’s solution to the problem of social order is often called
a “normative solution.” The use of this phrase contains the assumption
that Parsons explains the existence of order by reference to a common
system of norms or values. Once Parsons has been oversimplified in this
way, it is easy to take the next step and accuse him of not really explaining
the existence of order at all, but only offering a definition. And thus the
utilitarians feel justified in presenting again their old solutions—exchange
or constraint or some combination thereof—while ignoring Parsons’s dem-
onstration that these solutions are inherently inadequate.'*

If we do not want to miss the point of Parsons’s solution to the prob-
lem, we have to read him from the perspective of Kant, and that means
first of all recognizing that Parsons’s solution can be neither normative
nor utilitarian. Parsons presents a voluntaristic solution to the problem of
social order. The term “voluntaristic’” indicates that social order need not
be a completely causally determined factual order. As soon as a centralized
force does not provide a factual order by causally determined compliance,
social order is only possible as long as the actors voluntarily consent and
bind themselves to a common normative frame of reference. A normative
order of this kind, as opposed to a merely factual order, thus demands ra-
tional justification of particular norms by subsuming them to universally
accepted values. In fact, Parsons’s exposition of the voluntaristic theory of
action requires that he fight on two fronts. We have seen that he defines
his own position in opposition to the positivistic-utilitarian theory of ac-
tion, which recognizes no criterion for the selection of human actions other
than the rationality which weighs actions as means to ends. But he must
also define his own position in opposition to idealistic theories of action—
for example, that of German idealism, which understands all human action
as an objectification of Geist. In opposition to both of these extremes,
the voluntaristic theory of action maintains that human action must be
understood as the result of an interpenetration of means-end rationality
and a normative limitation on the free play of such rationality. Parsons
refers to this relation as one of “interdependence” or “interaction”: “The
voluntaristic system does not in the least deny an important role to con-
ditional and other non-normative elements, but considers them as inter-
dependent with the normative” (Parsons [1937] 1968, p. 82).14 Already
at this stage in the development of his theory, Parsons has in mind that
relation between analytically separate subsystems which he will later, in
the fifties, refer to as “interpenetration.”’!®

What precisely is meant by interpenetration between the “conditional”
and the “normative”? It does not mean that action is always, in every
particular case, determined by both components. It means rather that
social order is possible only if there is such an interpenetration between
self-interested, rationalized action and a frame of reference which sets the
limits of the process of the calculation of utility by ruling certain ends
and means out of bounds altogether and by giving to ‘others a stable
priority independent of factual conditions and means-end considerations.
Order can exist only if the actors are not free to shed their agreements
with one another as easily as they might shed an uncomfortably starched
shirt. The decisive question of transcendental logic is, then, Given that
social order exists, what conditions constitute the framework within which
social action necessarily takes place? Kant asks, If there is objective
scientific knowledge and if sense experience by itself can provide us with
only an unordered “sensuous manifold,” then whence the order and uni-
versal validity which are the defining characteristics of scientific knowl-
edge? Kant’s question and Parsons’s question have the same form. And
just as for Kant the answer to the question turned on the discovery of
the limits set on the arbitrariness of sense experience, so for Parsons the
answer to his question turns on the discovery of a limit on the arbitrari-
ness of action determined solely by subjective considerations of utility.
A social order cannot be established by utility considerations alone; there
must be something else which provides the structure within which alone
such considerations are possible. Parsons does not formulate his problem
in terms of a given activity of pure utilitarian action which then must
somehow be limited by norms. Rather, the limitation itself provides the
condition of possibility for that which it limits. This reversal of logical
priority is a characteristically Kantian maneuver.

The Kantian critical project is a comprehensive examination of the

14 An interpretation which falls just short of giving a formulation of this core of
Parsonian theory can be found in Alexander (1978). However, Alexander fails to
emphasize “interpenetration” as the central idea and instead argues within the limits
of the traditional theory of differentiation.

15 On this topic, see Luhmann 1977a, 1978b; Jensen 1978. According to Luhmann,
the concept of interpenetration occurs “only late” in Parsons’s writings, while Jensen
asserts that it is introduced in the mid-fifties. Both authors fail to see that already in
The Structure of Social Action Parsons is putting forth a theory of interpenetration.
Nor are they aware of the basic affinity of this conception with Kant’s philosophy.
Luhmann veers away from Parsons’s theoretical program before he really understands
it, and his attempt at a new conceptualization of the program does not even reach
the point at which Parsons left off, much less go beyond it.
specific capacities of the human faculties of knowledge—sense perception,
which supplies empirical data, and the understanding, which governs the
formation of concepts and judgments. Kant’s conclusion is that the or-
deredness of our experience, as it manifests itself in the fact that the
canons of universal validity, the rules of logical consistency, and the laws
of causality apply to it, is not something which is merely perceived, but
occurs only through the a priori limitation of the possibilities of perception,
the drawing of “the bounds of sense,” by the rules of concept formation
and the modes of unity in judgment. In the same way, Parsons conducts
an examination of the specific functions of the various elements of a sys-
tem of action: (1) ends; (2) a situation consisting of (a) available means
and (6) given conditions; and (3) a selective principle according to which
means and conditions can be related to ends (Parsons [1937] 1968, pp.
77-82). If the selective principle is a pure means-end rationality (Weber’s
Zweckrationalitét)—for example, the calculation of utility—no social or-
der can arise. A social order is possible only if there is a selective principle
which exempts certain means and ends from utilitarian considerations and
assigns to them a permanent priority. Within the limits thus established,
action is motivated by considerations of utility and is as variable as em-
pirical knowledge can be within the rules of the understanding.

As Kant shows, there are only two kinds of selective principles: hypo-
thetical and categorical. Only categorical principles can produce a con-
stancy of choice of actions through the variableness of situations of action.
We can make use of Kant’s distinction in order to understand Parsons’s
argument that social order is possible only if action is guided, not solely
by conditional selective principles, but also by normative selective prin-
ciples which determine the scope of the validity of the conditional, hypo-
thetical selective principles. These normative selective principles have the
same functional significance for the theory of action that the pure intui-
tions of space and time and the categories of the understanding have for
classical mechanics in Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason: “A normative ori-
entation is fundamental to the schema of action in the same sense that
space is fundamental to that of the classical mechanics; in terms of the
given conceptual scheme there is no such thing as action except as effort
to conform with norms just as there is no such thing as motion except
as change of location in space. In both cases the propositions are defini-
tions or logical corollaries of definitions. But it is not necessary for present
purposes even to raise the question whether human behavior is ‘really’
normatively oriented” (Parsons [1937] 1968, pp. 76-77).

A normative selective principle is a categorical rule in Kant’s sense. Its
validity is not dependent on the character of the individual situations in
which it is applied. Concretely, this means that, if there is to be a social
order, a rule such as, for example, that excluding the use of force and
fraud must not have merely a hypothetical validity contingent upon the
actors’ expectations of profiting from it. If the validity of the rule were
merely hypothetical, it would often turn out to be more advantageous for
actors to employ means which subvert the rule. This would prove the
impossibility of mutual trust, and Hobbes’s state of nature would be un-
avoidable. Further, the motivation to restrict oneself to peaceful means
of exchange under a threat of sanctions imposed by an external authority
would also be hypothetical, since the individual would accept this restric-
tion only as long as he himself was not strong enough to seize the position
of centralized authority and turn it against his fellows. In this case there
would be no selective principle guaranteeing a constancy of motives for
action and determining the use of peaceful means of exchange as the
limit of social interaction.

The first thing we get out of Parsons’s answer to the question of the
possibility of social order is the realization that the selective principle
setting the limits of self-interested action must be categorically valid for
all actors. That means that the actors obey the rule because it is their
obligation to do so, and not because they think it will be useful for them
to do so. The paramount question for a sociological theory of social order
must be, How is this categorical obligation possible? Only by understand-
ing the function of the normative rules in Parsons’s voluntaristic theory
of action from this Kantian perspective can we grasp the full significance
of Parsons’s theory. From the standpoint of this Kantian perspective, it
makes no sense to criticize Parsons for offering as an explanation of the
existence of social order the very fact he is supposed to be explaining,
that is, the existence of common norms. It is equally beside the point to
counter Parsons by proposing again the solutions of traditional utilitarian
thought—social exchange and, where this fails, a centralized authority
with the ability to impose sanctions (see Ellis 1971; Coleman 1971; Van-
berg 1978). Parsons has shown these solutions to be fundamentally in-
adequate, and it was in uncovering the sources of their inadequacy that
he first arrived at a formulation of the criterion a theory of social order
must meet in regard to the function of normative rules in a system of
social action. It is not enough simply to explain “how norms come into
existence.” One must explain precisely how a categorical obligation toward
common norms comes about within a social system. Norms exist only when
every actor in the social system can take general adherence to the norms
to be a matter of course. This is possible only if adherence to the norms
rests not upon merely hypothetical imperatives, but upon a categorical
obligation which sets a limit to the process of utilitarian calculation. Every
explanation of “the existence of norms” must simultaneously be an ex-
planation of the source of the obligatory force of those norms. We will
not be able to give this latter explanation if we continue to resort to free
exchange or centralization of authority, or any other explanatory factor
which remains wholly within the utilitarian framework.1¢

Parsons’s analysis of the system of social action allows him to pose,
in its correct form for the first time, the problem which the theory of
social order must solve. It points out the direction in which a solution
is impossible and the direction in which we must search if we are to find
a solution. But Parsons does not simply replace the utilitarian theory of
the genesis of norms with a normative theory which views social action
solely as it is determined by categorical obligation. According to the vol-
untaristic theory of action, norms can be generated only through the
interpenetration of action oriented toward a means-end rationality and a
categorical normative obligation. Neither the one nor the other by itself
yields a concrete social order. Where pure means-end rationality reigns,
no social order is possible. But if there is nothing but the categorical ob-
ligation to obey norms, with no interpenetration with the various spheres
of ordinary self-interested action, the result will be nothing but a “sacred”
order which will remain so remote from everyday behavior that it will
be incapable of imposing a concrete order.” An order permeating all areas
of social life can be expected only when the spheres of self-interested
action and categorical obligation interpenetrate. This interpenetration is
not something which can be taken for granted. The degree of such in-
terpenetration in a given society depends on specific conditions which
help or hinder it, conditions which it is the task of any theory of the
development of norms to articulate.18

A theory of the development of norms must therefore be a theory of
the interpenetration of opposed subsystems—in this case, the subsystem
of action directed by means-end rationality and the subsystem of cate-
gorical duty. Nowhere else in the discipline of sociology has this basic
idea, so essential for any theory of the development of norms and for
every theory of social change, been elaborated as lucidly as in the writings
of Talcott Parsons. It is all the more ironic, then, that among sociologists
it has become almost a ritual to deplore Parsons’s failure to provide an
explanation of the development of norms and of social change; explaining

16 This indispensable precondition of the explanation of the generation of norms as
the core of social change has been ignored by all those critics who have declared
Parsons’s theory unable to explain change. Consequently, all alternative theories
exhibit an overly narrow conception of the problem in question and are doomed to
failure from the start. This holds true of all contributions in this context from Dah-
rendorf via Mills right up to Gouldner and others.

17 If Weber had been able to finish his study of Islam, he would most likely have
made this point the center of his argument: “The holy right could not be abolished,
nor, in spite of all adaptation, could it be realized” (Weber [1922] 1976, p. 475).

18 Only from this general perspective can we understand Weber’s explanation of the
development of modern Occidental society. This in itself goes to prove the explanatory
potential of a theory of interpenetration.
THE SOURCES OF THE THEORY OF ACTION: WHITEHEAD, DURKHEIM,
WEBER, FREUD

The most important influences on the development of the theory of action
as a Kantian theory are Whitehead’s epistemology and Durkheim’s and
Weber’s sociology. These figures assumed in the course of Parsons’s devel-
opment greater significance than Marshall or Pareto, with whom they
are bracketed in The Structure of Social Action as founders of voluntaristic
action theory. Another very important figure in the development of the
theory is Freud, whose work Parsons studied in depth only after the
appearance of The Structure of Social Action.

Parsons’s “analytical realism,’’!® as an epistemological concept, has its
roots in the work of A. N. Whitehead ([1925] 1967). Analytical realism
claims that empirical phenomena acquire significance for a scientific dis-
cipline only when they are formulated in terms of the theoretical frame
of reference specific to that discipline. This means that any discipline
can consider only certain aspects of reality, never reality in its full con-
crete richness: “Descriptive frames of reference in this sense are funda-
mental to all science. But by no means do they exhaust scientific con-
ceptualization. Facts cannot be described except within such a schema.
But their description within it has, in the first instance, the function of
defining a ‘phenomenon’ which is to be explained. That is, of the great
mass of possible empirical observations we select those which are at the
same time meaningful within such a schema and ‘belong together.’ They
thus serve together to characterize the essential aspects of a concrete
phenomenon, which then becomes the object of scientific interest” (Par-
sons [1937] 1968, p. 30). We recognize this conception as a derivative
of Kant’s epistemology. The particular objects of a scientific discipline
are themselves constituted through the interpenetration of empirical ob-
servation and a theoretical frame of reference. The first function of the
theoretical frame of reference is to differentiate as sharply as possible the
various aspects of reality, in order to enable examination of the causal
relations that might subsist among these aspects. Its second function is
to open up the possibility of abstraction, which makes possible the trans-
ference of knowledge from one field of phenomena to other fields of
phenomena. These functions are best performed by a structure of cate-
gories which can be given increasingly greater specificity and analytical
precision through the internal differentiation of a few basic concepts and
which does not constantly have to keep introducing new concepts to handle
its empirical input. Thus the theoretical frame of reference should make
possible the abstraction from particulars, on the one hand, and the par-
ticularization of abstractions, on the other.

It is impossible to understand the mechanics of Parsons’s theory apart
from this background. The theory is designed to perform these two basic
functions, and the later development of the four-function schema can be
understood as the logical consequence of this fundamental commitment.
It is supposed to make possible both abstraction and analytic differentia-
tion, in order to provide the most precise assessment possible of the con-
tributions of various aspects of reality in the causation of certain phe-
nomena. This function of analytical schematization must be kept in mind
when one tries to understand the development of the theory of action.
Certainly this basic epistemological principle accounts for the emphasis,
in all of Parsons’s writings, on the process of concept formation as con-
stitutive of the “objects” of sociology. Yet, contrary to the frequent
criticisms leveled against it, the theory of action consists of much more
than mere “taxonomies.” Those who find in Parsons’s work nothing but
a taxonomy have failed to read him carefully.

Whitehead had a mostly formal influence on Parsons; the influence of
Durkheim, Weber, and Freud was substantive. According to Parsons,
Durkheim, Weber, and Freud all share a dualistic conception of action.
All three managed to avoid the pitfalls of reductionism which lay in both
directions. Durkheim was not a sociological reductionist, Weber was not
an idealistic reductionist, and Freud was not a biological reductionist—
although these charges are frequent even today.

Reviewing the utilitarianism of Spencer in his study of the division of
labor, Durkheim ([1893] 1964) points out that social exchange always
presupposes the existence of rules which are categorically binding. These
rules must be categorically binding if they are to serve as the “frame”
for the free association of individuals guided by considerations of utility.
If these rules themselves were constantly open to considerations of utility,
no one could have any confidence that those with whom he had entered
into social agreements would abide by those agreements. Durkheim holds,
in Kantian fashion, that a stable limit on the free calculation of utility
can only be the product of the moral-categorical authority of norms. Durk-
heim’s overriding concern is with the conditions which allow the genera-
tion of such categorical obligations and the moral crises which are en-
gendered in societies by the absence of such conditions.

Durkheim does more than stress the importance of obligation, however.
The normative order must also be related to the needs and dispositions
of individuals. Durkheim goes beyond Kant in his recognition that in-
dividuals must abide by norms not simply because they must, but because
they desire to do so. Hence the crucial point of a theory of moral order
must be the connection of social obligation with individual desire. This
insight is fundamental to the theory of the interpenetration of the social
system and the personality system.

Durkheim’s theoretical concerns begin with these basic questions and
branch out in the direction of a theory of the institutionalization of norms
in social systems and a theory of the internalization of norms within the
individual personality (Durkheim 1973a, 19735; Parsons 1967, [1937]
1968, pp. 324-408). Particularly important here is Durkheim’s theorem
that it is only insofar as the individual is part of a group on whose ap-
proval he is dependent that norms valid within the group can become
categorically obligatory for the individual. For Durkheim, it is the lack
of this bond between individual and group which explains the phenomenon
of suicide—not only egoistic suicide but also anomic suicide (Durkheim
[1897] 1972). But since such bonds exist only within groups which have
both intensive and extensive contact among their members, the crucial
question is, How can a society avoid particularization of these normatively
governed bonds? Durkheim sought the solution to this problem in the
strengthening of occupational groups as a basic element of social organiza-
tions and in the institutionalization of common responsibilities in common
assemblies which would enforce compromise decision making (Durkheim
[1893] 1964, pp. 1-31).

Durkheim also shows that the process of binding the individual to
norms and the development of personality are not submitted in every case
to zero-sum conditions. Division of labor has to be accompanied by the
loosening of ties between an individual and a group; otherwise, the in-
dividual would be unable to participate in social life outside his primary
reference group. The individual must be bound in succession to the norma-
tive demands of different groups; this is prerequisite not only for the
development of a comprehensive normative order but for individualization
as well.?° The “cult of the individual” is in this sense a form of social
order in which institutionalization of a normative order and the individua-
tion of the personality do not exclude each other, but reinforce each other.
This discovery of Durkheim’s is of decisive importance for Parsons’s
theory of institutionalization and internalization, because here Durkheim
sets forth a theory of the interpenetration of social system and personality.

We find such a theory of interpenetration in Weber’s work, too, par-
ticularly in his comparative studies in the sociology of religion ([1920]
1972).71 At the heart of Weber’s account of the origin and development
of Western society is a conception of the interpenetration of spheres which
outside the West have remained separate or even opposed to one another.
An especially important role is played here by the tension between re-
ligious ethics and the world, a tension which can be found, in the sense
of a process of analytical differentiation, almost everywhere. This tension
can be eased by any of four methods: accommodation to the world, escape
from the world, reconciliation, or mutual penetration.??

Accommodation to the world is the solution of Confucianism (Weber
[1920] 1972, 1:276-536). This solution is found predominantly in societies
in which religious ethics are articulated and expounded by a class which
is involved in practical life and has its own status interests: for example,
the Chinese literati. The consequence of this dominance of the sphere of
means-end rationality over the sphere of religious ethics is the lack of an
ethical order which could permeate the whole society. There can thus be
only a limited ethical control of practical, utilitarian action.

The paradigmatic example of reconciliation is Hinduism (Weber [1920]
1972, vol. 2). The characteristic of this solution to the problem of the
tension between religious ethics and the world is the separation of dif-
ferent spheres having their own internal order (the castes). These mini-
societies are integrated on the theoretical level by the ideology of the
causality of karma and the transmigration of souls. There is no possibility
here for a general religious ethics that would cover all of the different
social spheres. There can only be particularized ethics for each sphere.

The paradigmatic example of escape from the world as a solution to
our problem is Buddhism (Weber [1920] 1972, vol. 2). This solution
tends to arise in situations in which religious ethics is primarily the con-
cern of a class of intellectuals who are isolated from the concerns of prac-
tical life. The result is a sharp distinction between the ethics of the priests
and the ethics of the laymen and the absence of a general ethical code
which could regulate the actions in the spheres of everyday life.

A mutual penetration of religious ethics and the world is found only in
the Occident, and within the Occident its most. complete realization is
ascetic Protestantism (Weber [1920] 1972, 1:17-237). Here alone have
the practical spheres of economics and politics been ethically regulated,
rather than consigned simply to the realms of utilitarian action and the
manipulation of power. The typical Puritan business ethic is neither a
mere appendage of economic acquisitiveness nor a pure emanation of
religious ethics. It is instead the qualitatively new product of the in-
terpenetration of two basically opposed spheres. Nothing comparable exists
outside the Occident. This penetration of ethics into the domain of business
is for Weber the specific mark of modern capitalism, in comparison with
all non-Western and premodern forms of economic behavior. It could
have occurred only where two institutionally independent spheres came
together while retaining their own essential character.

Although the institutional independence of the Christian religion re-
sulted very early from the institutionalization of the custom of educating
priests at universities, the penetration of the economic and _ political
spheres by religion occurred only gradually and by steps. A giant step
in this direction was the development of the medieval city, because in
it, unlike the non-Western city, the religious community, the political
community, and the market economy all were brought together (Weber
[1922] 1976, pt. 2, chap. 9, sec. 7). But still there was a large gap between
priestly ethics and lay ethics, and the bureaucratic organization of the
institutionalized church tended to substitute control of external behavior
for the internalization of norms. Yet religion and the world were close
enough to create ever more extreme tensions between them as economic
activity increased. These tensions were released by the Reformation,
through a stronger ethical penetration of the world. The traditionalism
of the German Reformation caused this process to be coupled there with
a strengthening of absolutism. As a result, only in Calvinism and in the
Puritan sects and denominations of England, the Netherlands, and the
United States was there a truly reciprocal penetration of religious ethics
and the world. Important elements of this development were the radical
elimination of any distinction between an ethics for the priests and an
ethics for the laymen and the importance given to internal control of
behavior, an importance conferred first by Calvin’s doctrine of predestina-
tion.2? Of paramount importance, however, was the tight binding of the
individual to the group by its approval which was achieved within the
free religious communities of Puritanism.4

We cannot understand the emergence of the modern normative order,
which manages to be both universal and individualistic, and both rational
and activistic, apart from this interpenetration of religious ethics and the
world. The characteristic of this modern order is that it is able to main-
tain a common identity while encompassing a range of social activities
that includes everything from philosophical theories of morality to prac-
tical problems of economic and political action. Only the Occident rec-
ognizes the philosophical concept of natural law, and the reciprocal pene-
tration of “sacred” and “profane” codes is peculiar to the Occident. Out-
side the Occident, these two realms have remained alien to one another,
or one has dominated the other. In order to explain the genesis of the
unique social order of the Occident, Weber has implicit recourse to a
theory of interpenetration. Apart from this theoretical perspective, we
will fail to understand Weber’s explanation of the origin and development
of Western society. It is the merit of Talcott Parsons to have distilled
this theoretical perspective from Weber’s sociological writings and to have
made it the central idea of his own theory of action.

As the third source of the theory of action, Sigmund Freud is considered
by Parsons to have made the same contribution to a theory of the inter-
penetration of social system and personality, from the perspective of the
personality, as Durkheim made from the perspective of the social system.
For Parsons, this convergence is of fundamental significance for the future
development of the social sciences: “This convergence, from two quite
distinct and independent starting points, deserves to be ranked as one of
the truly fundamental landmarks of the development of modern social
science” (Parsons 1953, p. 15).

Through his analytic differentiation of the personality into an id, an
ego, and a superego, Freud develops a perspective on personality which
allows him to view it as a zone of interpenetration of the structure of
drives, external reality, and cultural norms (Freud 1972). In connection
with this Freudian schema, Parsons emphasizes that already in the earliest
(oral) phase in the psychic development of the child, the reality principle
of the ego, as well as the affective motivation of the id, is shaped by
interaction with social objects, primarily the mother, and so is the result
of symbolic processes. This means that the ego and the id are no less
cultural products than the superego, an assertion which Parsons claims
that Freud found himself increasingly drawn to.

Freud’s analyses of the forms of identification between mother and
child, and of the differentiation of the object cathexes in the oedipal stage
and in the later stages of latency and adolescence, are of great importance
for the understanding of the process of socialization (see Parsons 1956a,
1956, 1964a, 19645, Parsons and Bales 1956). Identification is the result
of the fact that the child in the oral phase is dependent on others for the
satisfaction of his needs and desires; its basic mechanism is the cathexis
of the libidinal object. This object cathexis progresses from a more par-
ticularized dependence on pleasure to a more generalized and symbolically
formed dependence on love. Identification is the basis for the internaliza-
tion of cultural norms, which are psychically represented by the object
of identification. In the oedipal phase, however, there is a loss of early
objects of identification, along with a differentiation of object cathexes
and a corresponding growth of as many identifications as there are dyadic
relations for the child within the different roles within the family and,
subsequently, outside the family, in peer groups and classrooms. Simul-
taneously, a differentiation occurs between the child’s identification with
individual role-partners in the group and his identification with the group
as a whole. In this process of differentiation of object cathexes and the
loss of infantile identifications, the internalized cultural norms are gen-
eralized and detached from particular identifications. The superego which
is the result of this process is thus not a replication of the institutionalized
norms of a concrete group but rather a generalization from various sys-
tems of norms which enables the individual to take part in social life
outside his original reference group and to attain a steadily increasing
autonomy. What Parsons primarily takes from Freud is this conception
of the simultaneous, mutually reinforcing expansions of the scope of the
social system and the personal autonomy of the individual as part of
one complex process, a process dependent upon a specific form of inter-
penetration.
an understanding of this Kantian core, it is impossible to follow the further
development of the theory of action. In fact, all of Parsons’s further the-
oretical development is a series of refinements of this theoretical instru-
ment for the analysis of relations of interpenetration. Before anything
else, one needed an instrument with which one could analytically detach
subsystems which possessed their own rule-governed order from the con-
crete manifold of reality. Once this was accomplished, one would be able
to analyze these subsystems as pure “ideal types” while also studying
the nature and extent of their interpenetration. The fundamental theorem
here is not the old doctrine of differentiation, according to which systems
can increase their capacities through a process of functional differentiation,
but the theorem of interpenetration, according to which only a process
which allows both the greatest unfolding of the internal laws of a sub-
system and the greatest amount of interpenetration with other subsystems
can produce a new level of development for the subsystems and the system
as a whole. This new level of development is as much the result of the
tension between the subsystems as it is the result of their unity. The
interpenetration of subsystems unifies opposites and raises the threshold
level of tension which the systems can accommodate while still retaining
their identity and unity.?®

Ethics and business, for example, are here not isolated spheres with
rules and laws wholly unique to each. Yet they are relatively independent
of one another. They are shaped by different social groups, and so they
remain clearly separable from one another. Their mutual interpenetra-
tion, in which, for example, members of the same congregation become
business partners, opens the possibility of the ethical regulation of busi-
ness and forces ethics to be relevant to business life.

We can call a relationship formed thus between business and ethics a
dialectical one, as long as we understand that we accept the biases of
neither the idealistic nor the materialistic dialectics (in fact, these biases
prevent the idealistic and materialistic “dialectics” from being true dia-
lectics at all).27 In the zone of interpenetration between business and
ethics there appears a new phenomenon: business ethics, which is neither
pure business nor pure ethics, but something in between. It brings previ-
ously separate spheres together without incorporating one into the other,
and it raises the level of each subsystem’s tolerance for what had previ-
ously been incompatible with it, although this incompatibility can in prin-
ciple never be totally eliminated. In such a system the possibilities of
both economic action and ethical action are expanded. Interpenetration
increases the scope and power of both spheres.?8

Parsons’s theoretical development after The Structure of Social Action
moves clearly in the direction of refining his theoretical instrument for
the analytical differentiation of subsystems and the analysis of the rela-
tions of interpenetration among them. The major landmarks in this de-
velopment are: (1) the differentiation of cultural system, social system,
and personality, and the analysis of institutionalization and internalization
in The Social System (1951) and Toward a General Theory of Action
(Parsons and Shils 1951); (2) the differentiation of levels of systems and
the macroscopic-microscopic application of the four-function paradigm in
Working Papers in the Theory of Action (Parsons, Bales, and Shils 1953);
(3) the introduction of the hierarchy of cybernetic control and of the
media of interchange (a) on the level of the social system (money, political
power, influence, value commitments) in Economy and Society and after
(Parsons and Smelser 1956; Parsons 1969a, 1969, 1969c); (5) on the
level of the system of action (intelligence, performance capacity, affect,
definition of situation), which dates from The American University (Par-
sons and Platt 1973; Parsons 1977c); and (c) on the level of the human
condition as a whole in “A Paradigm of the Human Condition” (1978c).

In all of these works, Talcott Parsons has created a theory which might
be compared with Kant’s critical philosophy. The task of examining the
substantive and methodological issues in his work in order to reach a just
determination of Parsons’s contribution to the social sciences will occupy
social scientists for a long time to come.?®
REFERENCES

Alexander, J. C. 1978. “Formal and Substantive Voluntarism in the Work of Talcott
Parsons: A Theoretical and Ideological Interpretation.” American Sociological Re-
view 43:177-98.

Bendix, R. 1971. “Two Sociological Traditions.” Pp. 282-98 in Scholarship and Par-
tisanship: Essays on Max Weber, edited by R. Bendix and G. Roth. Berkeley and
Los Angeles: University of California Press.

Bershady, H. J. 1973. Ideology and Social Knowledge. Oxford: Blackwell.

. 1977. “Commentary on Talcott Parsons’ Review of H. J. Bershady’s Ideology
and Social Knowledge.” Pp. 134-41 in Social Systems and the Evolution of Action
Theory, by T. Parsons. New York: Free Press.

Buchanan, J. M. 1975. The Limits of Liberty: Between Anarchy and Leviathan. Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press.

Burger, T. 1977. “Talcott Parsons, the Problem of Order in Society, and the Program
of an Analytical Sociology.” American Journal of Sociology 83:320-34.

Cohen, J. 1975. “Moral Freedom through Understanding in Durkheim: Comment on
Pope.” American Sociological Review 40:104-6.

Coleman, J. S. 1971. “Collective Decisions.” Pp. 272-86 in Institutions and Social Ex-
change, edited by H. Turk and R. L. Simpson. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill.

. 1974a. “Inequality, Sociology, and Moral Philosophy.” American Journal of

Sociology 80:739-64.

. 1974b. Power and the Structure of Society. New York: Norton.

Dahrendorf, R. 1955. “Struktur und Funktion: Talcott Parsons und die Entwicklung
der soziologischen Theorie.” Kélner Zeitschrift fiir Soziologie und Sozialpsychologie
7:491-519.

. 1958. “Out of Utopia: Toward a Reorientation of Sociological Analysis.”
American Journal of Sociology 64:115-27.

Durkheim, E. (1893) 1964. The Division of Labor in Society. New York: Free Press.

. (1897) 1972. Suicide: A Study in Sociology, edited by G. Simpson. London:

Routledge & Kegan Paul.

. 1973a. Moral Education: A Study in the Theory and Application of the So-

ciology of Education, edited by E. K. Wilson. New York: Free Press.

. 1973b. On Morality and Society: Selected Writings, edited by R. N. Bellah.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Ellis, D. P. 1971. “The Hobbesian Problem of Order: A Critical Appraisal of the
Normative Solution.” American Sociological Review 36:692-703.

Faris, E. 1953. “Review of T. Parsons: ‘The Social System.’” American Sociological
Review 18:103-6.

Freud, S. 1972. “Das Ich und das Es.” Pp. 237-427 in Gesammelte Werke. Vol. 13. 7th
ed. Frankfurt: Fischer.

Gouldner, A. W. 1971. The Coming Crisis of Western Sociology. London: Heinemann.

Hobbes, T. (1651) 1966. Leviathan. Collected English Works of Thomas Hobbes,
edited by W. Molesworth. Vol. 3. Aalen: Scientia Verlag.

House, F. N. 1939. “Review of T. Parsons: ‘The Structure of Social Action.’” Ameri-
can Journal of Sociology 45:129-30.

. 1950. “Review of T. Parsons: ‘The Structure of Social Action.’” American
Journal of Sociology 55:504-5.

Hume, D. (1748) 1902. “An Inquiry concerning Human Understanding.” Pp. 5-165
in Enquiries concerning the Human Understanding and concerning the Principles
of Morals, edited by L. A. Selby-Bigge. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

. (1739-40) 1973. A Treatise on Human Nature, edited by L. A. Selby-Bigge.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Jensen, S. 1978. “Interpenetration—zum Verhiltnis personaler und sozialer Systeme?”
Zeitschrift fiir Soziologie 7:116-29.

Kant, I. 1956a. Critique of Practical Reason. Translated by L. W. Beck. Indianapolis:
Bobbs-Merrill.
. (1781) 1956b. Kritik der reinen Vernunft. Hamburg: Meiner.

——. (1797) 1967. Kritik der praktischen Vernunft. Hamburg: Meiner.

. (1799) 1968. Kritik der Urteilskraft. Hamburg: Meiner.

Loubser, J. J.. R. C. Baum, A. Effrat, and V. M. Lidz, eds. 1976. Explorations in Gen-
eral Theory in Social Science: Essays in Honor of Talcott Parsons. New York: Free
Press.

Luhmann, N. 1977a. “Arbeitsteilung und Moral—Durkheims Theorie.” Introduction
to Uber die Teilung der sozialen Arbeit, by ¥. Durkheim. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp.

. 1977b. “Interpenetration—zum Verhiltnis personaler und sozialer Systeme.”

Zeitschrift fiir Soziologie 6:62—76.

. 1978a. “Interpenetration bei Parsons.” Zeitschrift fiir Soziologie 7:299-302.

. 1978b. “Soziologie der Moral.” Pp. 8-116 in Theorietechnik und Moral, edited
by N. Luhmann and S. Pfiirtner. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp.

Mills, C. W. 1959. The Sociological Imagination. London: Oxford University Press.

Miinch, R. 1973. Gesellschaftstheorie und Ideologiekritik. Hamburg: Hoffman &
Campe.

. 1976a. Legitimitat und politische Macht. Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag.

. 1976b. Theorie sozialer Systeme: Eine Einfiirung in Grundbegriffe, Grundan-

nahmen und logische Struktur. Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag.

. 1978a. “ ‘Kapitalismus’ und ‘okzidentaler Rationalismus’: Zwei Perspektiven

zur Analyse der Strukturprobleme moderner Gesellschaften.” Pp. 72-106 in The-

orienvergleich in den Sozialwissenschaften, edited by K. O. Hondrich and J. Matthes.

Neuwied: Luchterhand.

. 1978b. “Max Webers ‘Anatomie des okzidentalen Rationalismus’: Eine sys-

temtheoretische Lektiire.” Soziale Welt 29:217-46.

. 19804. “Talcott Parsons und die Theorie des Handelns II: Die Kontinuitat

der Entwicklung.” Soziale Welt 31(1):3-47.

. 1980b. “Uber Parsons zu Weber: Von der Theorie der Rationalisierung zur
Theorie der Interpenetration.” Zeitschrift fiir Soziologie 9(1) :18-53.

Nelson, B. 1969. The Idea of Usury: From Tribal Brotherhood to Universal Other-
hood. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Parsons, T. 1928. “Capitalism in Recent German Literature: Sombart and Weber, I.”
Journal of Political Economy 36:641-61.

. 1929. “Capitalism in Recent German Literature: Sombart and Weber, II.”

Journal of Political Economy 37:31-51.

. 1931, “Wants and Activities in Marshall.” Quarterly Journal of Economics

46:101-40.

. 1932. “Economics and Sociology: Marshall in Relation to the Thought of His

Time.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 46:316-47.

. 1936. “Pareto’s Central Analytical Scheme.” Journal of Social Philosophy

1:244-62.

. 1951. The Social System. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press.

. 1953. “The Superego and the Theory of Social Systems.” Pp. 13-29 in Par-

sons, Bales, and Shils 1953.

. 1956a. “Family Structure and the Socialization of the Child.” Pp. 35-131 in

Family, Socialization, and Interaction Process, by T. Parsons and R. F. Bales. Lon-

don: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

. 19566. “The Organization of Personality as a System of Action.” Pp. 133-86

in Family, Socialization, and Interaction Process, by T. Parsons and R. F. Bales.

London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

. 1963. “Introduction” to Max Weber, The Sociology of Religion. Translated

by E. Fischoff. Boston: Beacon.

. 1964a. “The Incest Taboo in Relation to Social Structure and the Socializa-

tion of the Child.” Pp. 57-77 in Social Structure and Personality. New York: Free

Press.

. 19646. “Social Structure and the Development of Personality: Freud’s Con-
tribution to the Integration of Psychology and Sociology.” Pp. 78-111 in Social

Structure and Personality. New York: Free Press.

. 1967. “Durkheim’s Contribution to the Theory of Integration of Social Sys-

tems.” Pp. 3-34 in Sociological Theory and Modern Society. New York: Free Press.

. (1933) 1968. “Pareto.” Pp. 411-16 in International Encyclopedia of the Social

Sciences, edited by D. L. Sills. Vol. 11. New York: Macmillan.

. (1937) 1968. The Structure of Social Action. New York: Free Press.

. 1969a. “On the Concept of Influence.” Pp. 405-38 in Politics and Social Struc-

ture. New York: Free Press.

. 19696. “On the Concept of Political Power.” Pp. 352-404 in Politics and So-

cial Structure. New York: Free Press.

. 1969¢c. “On the Concept of Value-Commitments.” Pp. 439-72 in Politics and

Social Structure. New York: Free Press.

. 1970. “On Building Social System Theory: A Personal History.” Daedalus

99:826-81.

. 1972. “Review of ‘Reinhard Bendix and Giinther Roth: Scholarship and Par-

tisanship: Essays on Max Weber.’” Contemporary Sociology 1 (1972): 200-203.

. 1975. “Comment on ‘Parsons’ Interpretation of Durkheim’ and on ‘Moral

Freedom through Understanding in Durkheim’: Comment on Pope and Cohen.”

American Sociological Review 40:106-11.

. 1976. “Reply to Cohen, Hazelrigg and Pope.” American Sociological Review

41:361-65.

. 1977a. “Comment on Burger’s Critique.” American Journal of Sociology

83 :335-39,

. 1977b. “Review of ‘Harold J. Bershady: Ideology and Social Knowledge.’”

Pp. 122-34 in Social Systems and the Evolution of Action Theory. New York: Free

Press.

. 1977c. “Some Problems of General Theory in Sociology.” Pp. 229-69 in Social

Systems and the Evolution of Action Theory. New York: Free Press.

. 1978a. Action Theory and the Human Condition. New York: Free Press.

. 19786. “Comment on R. Stephen Warner’s ‘Toward a Redefinition of Action

Theory: Paying the Cognitive Element Its Due.’” American Journal of Sociology

83:1350-58.

. 1978c. “A Paradigm of the Human Condition.” Pp. 352-433 in Parsons 1978a.

Parsons, T., and R. F. Bales. 1956. “Conclusions: Levels of Cultural Generality and
the Process of Differentiation.” Pp. 353-94 in Family, Socialization, and Interaction
Process. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

Parsons, T., R. F. Bales, and E. A. Shils. 1953. Working Papers in the Theory of Ac-
tion. Glencoe, IIl.: Free Press.

Parsons, T., and G. M. Platt. 1973. The American University. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press.

Parsons, T., and E. A. Shils, eds. 1951. Toward a General Theory of Action. Glencoe,
Ill.: Free Press.

Parsons, T., and N. J. Smelser. 1956. Economy and Society. London: Routledge &
Kegan Paul.

Pope, W. 1973. “Classic on Classic: Parsons’ Interpretation of Durkheim.” American
Sociological Review 38:399-415.

. 1975. “Parsons on Durkheim, Revisited: Reply to Cohen and Parsons.” Amer-
ican Sociological Review 40:111-15.

Pope, W., and J. Cohen. 1978. “On R. Stephen Warner’s ‘Toward a Redefinition of
Action Theory: Paying the Cognitive Element Its Due.’” American Journal of
Sociology 83:1359-67.

Pope, W., J. Cohen, and L. E. Hazelrigg. 1975. “On the Divergence of Weber and
Durkheim: A Critique of Parsons’ Convergence Thesis.” American Sociological Re-
view 40:417-27.

. 1977. “Reply to Parsons.” American Sociological Review 42:809~11.
Schluchter, W. 1976. “Die Paradoxie der Rationalisierung: Zum Verhiltnis von ‘Ethik’
und ‘Welt’ bei Max Weber.” Zeitschrift fiir Soziologie 5:256-84.

. 1978. “Max Webers Gesellschaftsgeschichte: Versuch einer Explikation.” Kél-

ner Zeitschrift fiir Soziologie und Sozialpsychologie 30:438-67.

. 1979. Die Entwicklung des okzidentalen Rationalismus: Eine Analyse von Max
Webers Gesellschaftsgeschichte. Tiibingen: Mohr Siebeck.

Schiitte, H. G. 1977. “Handlungen, Rollen und Systeme: Uberlegungen zur Soziologie
Max Webers und Talcott Parsons.” Pp. 17-57 in Handlungstheorie interdisziplindr,
edited by H. Lenk. Vol. 4. Munich: Fink.

Schutz, A., and T. Parsons. 1977. Zur Theorie sozialen Handelns: Ein Briefwechsel,
edited with an introduction by W. M. Sprondel. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp.

Schwanenberg, E. 1970. Soziales Handeln: Die Theorie und ihr Problem. Bern: Huber.

. 1971. “The Two Problems of Order in Parsons’ Theory: An Analysis from
Within.” Social Forces 49:561-81.

Tenbruck, F. H. 1975. “Das Werk Max Webers.” Kélner Zeitschrift fiir Soziologie und
Sozialpsychologie 27:663-702.

Vanberg, V. 1975. Die zwei Soziologien: Individualismus und Kollektivismus in der
Sozialtheorie. Tiibingen: Mohr Siebeck.

. 1978. “Kollektive Giiter und kollektives Handeln.” Kélner Zeitschrift fiir So-
sziologie und Sozialpsychologie 30:652-79.

van den Berghe, P. L. 1963. “Dialectic and Functionalism: Toward a Theoretical
Synthesis.” American Sociological Review 28:695-705.

Warner, R. S. 1978. “Toward a Redefinition of Action Theory: Paying the Cognitive
Element Its Due.” American Journal of Sociology 83:1317-49.

Weber, M. (1920) 1972. Gesammelte Aufsiétze zur Religionssoziologie. Tiibingen: Mohr
Siebeck.

. (1922) 1973. “Wissenschaft als Beruf.” In Gesammelte Aufsatze zur Wissen-

schaftslehre. Tiibingen: Mohr Siebeck.

. (1922) 1976. Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft. Tiibingen: Mohr Siebeck.

Whitehead, A. N. (1925) 1967. Science and the Modern World. New York: Macmillan.
