Simmel's Influence on American Sociology. I

Author(s): Donald N. Levine, Ellwood B. Carter and Eleanor Miller Gorman
Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 81, No. 4 (Jan., 1976), pp. 813-845
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2777598

Accessed: 08-06-2016 03:25 UTC
Georg Simmel stands in the unusual position of being the only European
scholar who has had a palpable influence on sociology in the United States
throughout the course of the 20th century. This is particularly noteworthy
in view of the fact that, contrary to current impressions about the history
of the discipline, when sociology was becoming established within the
American academic system during the first few decades of this century, it
was truly a homegrown product.

Social research in this country was initially stimulated by such indigenous
currents in American intellectual life as pragmatism and the social gospel
movement, and by conspicuous domestic problems such as crime, ethnic
relations, immigration, industrial conflict, suffragism, and rapid changes
in rural and urban communities. Its leading proponents were predominantly
self-made American social analysts—Charles Horton Cooley, Franklin H.
Giddings, Edward A. Ross, William Graham Sumner, and Lester F. Ward.
These five were the men named most frequently as important sources of
intellectual stimulation in the autobiographical statements of 258 Ameri-
can sociologists collected by Luther L. Bernard in 1927. Only 20% of
those respondents mentioned any European author as having exerted a
significant influence on their intellectual outlook.”

Among the European authors who were mentioned as influential by
professional American sociologists in the late 1920s, the three most often
cited were, in order of frequency, Herbert Spencer, Georg Simmel, and
Gabriel Tarde. A similar picture emerges from a look at the general
treatises on sociology and social psychology of that period: the authors
most frequently cited are the pioneer American sociologists listed above
and their epigoni, while the scarcer citations of Europeans are invariably
to Spencer and Simmel, frequently to Tarde, Comte, Hobhouse, and Durk-
heim, and rarely if ever to Marx, Tonnies, Pareto, or Weber.®

Not long after Bernard’s survey, however, interest in Spencer, Tarde,
Comte, and Hobhouse dropped precipitously and irreversibly; in their
place as sources of stimulation from abroad came Vilfredo Pareto—himself
later eclipsed by an upsurge of attention to the works of Karl Marx—and,
slowly but more durably, Emile Durkheim and Max Weber. Interest in
Simmel, by contrast, remained alive though subdued during the 1930s and
1940s and thereafter revived to become more extensive than ever.

Simmel’s influence on American sociology is unusual in another respect.
Although literate American sociologists today could be expected to produce
a coherent statement of the theoretical frameworks and principal themes
of Marx, Durkheim, and Weber, few would be able to do the same for
Simmel. In good measure this condition reflects the character of Simmel’s
intellectual productions themselves: the bewildering variety of topics he
treated and the disorganized manner in which he presented his general
principles. After all, Simmel himself advised the reader of Soziologie
(1908) that the best way to get a complete picture of what his volume
contained would be to consult the list of topics presented (in alphabetical
order) in the index! However, the fragmentary picture of Simmel’s soci-
ology held by American sociologists must also be connected with the dis-
jointed manner in which his ideas entered the mainstream of American
sociology over the past seven decades, not to mention the transmutations
they underwent in the process. The two parts of this paper attempt to
outline the main events in the long and erratic career of Simmel’s thought
in the history of sociology in the United States.
1895-1930: Defining the Sociological Domain

The diffusion of Simmel’s sociological writings to the United States de-
pended initially on the fact that many of those who sought to establish
the social sciences in American universities looked to the universities of
Germany for inspiration and legitimation and, in particular, that a small
number of graduate students (from Johns Hopkins, Harvard, and the
University of Chicago) who subsequently occupied influential positions in
American sociology studied at the University of Berlin when Simmel was
active there.* Simmel stood out during those years as one who took the
question of establishing a clearly demarcated analytic domain for sociology
with especial seriousness, and his forthright delimitation of the field helped
to provide a sense of professional identity for some of those who learned
from him.

Albion W. Small was the earliest American sociologist to establish a
link with Simmel. Small studied at the University of Berlin in 1880,
when Simmel himself was a student there. At some point the two developed
a close collegial relationship. Small visited Simmel during later trips to
Germany and corresponded regularly with him. He thus kept abreast of
Simmel’s sociological productions from the outset and became the first to
bring the good news of Simmel’s work to the United States.

Among those who actually attended Simmel’s lectures in Berlin were
no fewer than six men who became sociologists as the discipline was
starting to gain footing in American universities: Frederick A. Bushee,
Charles A. Ellwood, Edward C. Hayes, Robert E. Park, Nicholas J.
Spykman, and Howard J. Woolston. Ellwood, sometimes called the
“founder of scientific psychological sociology,” heard Simmel lecture in
the fall of 1897. Although he considered Simmel’s approach to social
psychology excessively philosophical, Ellwood recalled that he had found
some of Simmel’s ideas very stimulating, and named him as one who had
a significant impact on his intellectual career.5 Robert Park, who was to
become the most influential of Simmel’s American students, arrived in
Berlin two years later. Acquiring from Simmel the only formal instruction
in sociology he ever had, Park later recalled that “it was from Simmel that
I finally gained a fundamental point of view for the study of the newspaper
and society” (Baker 1973, p. 256).

If the first condition favoring the transmission of Simmel’s ideas to the
United States was the creation of agents of diffusion through direct contact
with Simmel in Germany, the second was the creation of a center of diffu-
sion at a single prominent institution. Of the 11 sociologists in Bernard’s
survey who indicated that they had been strongly influenced by Simmel,
six were directly and one indirectly associated with the University of
Chicago.®

Albion Small established the first department of sociology in the United
States at the University of Chicago in 1892, and founded the American
Journal of Sociology there in 1895. Through the department and the A/S
Small was well situated to promote the dissemination of Simmel’s ideas.
Around the turn of the century Small sent three of his students to Berlin
to study with Simmel. He undertook an active program of publishing
papers by Simmel in the AJS—15 such entries appeared between volumes
2 and 16, most translated by Small himself—and also published an ap-
preciative article by S. P. Altmann, “Simmel’s Philosophy of Money,” in
1903.

Small was particularly attracted by Simmel’s seriousness about the need
to define a proper domain for sociology; after all, as Small wrote to one
of his colleagues in 1908, “the main business of my life is to show that
there is a definitely definable field for the division of social science to
which we are applying the name Sociology.” Although Small hesitated
to embrace Simmel’s definition of the domain, he remained steadfast in
his efforts to secure a proper hearing for Simmel’s formulations. In the
year before he died, he expressed one last “devout hope” that American
sociologists would be wise enough to familiarize themselves with Simmel’s
social theory (Small 1925, p. 87).

Activity on Simmel’s behalf at Chicago continued under Robert Park,
who succeeded Small as the dominant figure in the department. Apart from
the interest in Simmel which Park kindled in his own students, he gave a
major boost to the diffusion of Simmel’s writings through the list of
readings assembled with his junior colleague, Ernest W. Burgess, and
published in 1921 by the University of Chicago Press as their Introduction
to the Science of Sociology. The Park and Burgess volume included 10
selections by Simmel, some of them new translations made by Park—many
more selections than were drawn from any other author. “Park and Bur-
gess” became the most influential introduction to sociology in the United
States in the 1920s and 1930s, playing a major role in the exposure of
generations of sociology students to Simmel’s writings.

Although almost no new translations of Simmel’s work were published
in the United States for nearly three decades after the Park and Burgess
volume, another contribution to the diffusion of Simmel’s sociology was
issued by the University of Chicago Press in 1925. This was Nicholas J.
Spykman’s The Social Theory of Georg Simmel. Spykman summarized
much of Simmel’s sociological material in a systematic, albeit uninspired,
fashion, thereby enabling American students to become acquainted with
some ideas contained in Simmel’s untranslated works.

By 1930, then, three decades of students at the preeminent department
of sociology in the United States had been exposed to men who had had
personal contact with and enthusiasm for Simmel, and through the publica-
tions of the University of Chicago Press the fledgling sociological com-
munity in the country had been given readier access to a small but
provocative sampling of Simmel’s sociological thought.

By the end of this period, the process of drawing attention to Simmel
was no longer confined to Chicago—nor was all of it favorable. In Con-
temporary Sociological Theories Pitirim A. Sorokin devoted considerable
space to Simmel, rejecting his sociological enterprise as misguided in aim
and flawed in execution, and warning that “‘to call the sociologists back to
Simmel, as Drs. Park and Spykman do, means to call them back to a pure
speculation, metaphysics, and a lack of scientific method” (1928, p. 502,
n. 26).7 Theodore Abel, in an energetically argued critique of Simmel’s
“formal sociology” in Systematic Sociology in Germany, faulted Simmel
1930-55: Recovering the European Classics

From the early 1930s to the late 1950s, American sociology appears to
have been animated by two rather different kinds of value orientations.
One, representing what has been called the dominant American ethic of
instrumental activism, motivated the development of new observational
technologies, substantive specializations, and responsiveness to societal
demands for the services of social research. The other orientation, that of
a small minority, was concerned chiefly with the quality of thought in
intellectual work. Expressed by those who sought to introduce a finer
philosophical tone into the discipline (and were perhaps sensitive to the
threat to European civilization posed by the rise of Nazism), it actuated
the efforts of Europe-oriented American scholars and European immigrants
who sought to acquaint American colleagues with rich works from the
European literature which had been neglected.

It was chiefly the latter impulse which sustained the limited interest
in the works of Simmel throughout the second period. At the University
of Chicago, a tradition of interest in Simmel was symbolically institutional-
ized with the publication in 1931 of Park’s 1899 notes on Simmel’s Berlin
lectures, issued by the Society for Social Research, a newly formed or-
ganization of faculty and graduate students from the Chicago department.
The tradition of teaching Simmel at the University of Chicago was con-
Simmel’s Influence on American Sociology. I

tinued by Park’s students, Louis Wirth and Everett C. Hughes, and by
their younger colleague, Edward A. Shils. In 1936, Shils translated Sim-
mel’s essay on the metropolis and mental life for the benefit of the students
at Chicago. Hughes published his translation of “The Sociology of
Sociability” in the AJS in 1949.

Meanwhile, instruction concerning Simmel was spreading to other
universities. Talcott Parsons, who studied in Germany in the mid-1920s
and became familiar with Simmel’s work as well as that of Max Weber
and other German scholars, offered an influential course on social theory
at Harvard in the early 1930s which considered the works of Simmel,
Durkheim, Hobhouse, and Weber. Robert K. Merton has attributed the
origins of his interest in Simmel to that course, as well as to the Simmel
selections in the Park and Burgess volume and the numerous references to
Simmel in Sorokin’s Contemporary Sociological Theories.®

Merton himself went on to make Columbia University an important
center for the diffusion of Simmel’s sociology. Having acquired a personal
copy of Soziologie during a trip to Europe in 1937, Merton soon after
began to affect generations of students through concentrated attention to
Simmel in his basic courses on the history of sociological theory and
analysis of social structure. Merton’s interest in Simmel came to be shared
by several of his students at Columbia, including a number who figure
prominently later in this paper: Peter M. Blau, James S. Coleman, Lewis
A. Coser, and Charles Kadushin.

Another center for the teaching of Simmel appeared in the 1930s with
the establishment of the University in Exile at the New School for
Social Research in New York City. Created to provide a haven for
European scholars who had escaped the menace of Nazism, the University
in Exile (shortly renamed the Graduate Faculty of Political and Social
Science) symbolizes the major impetus of the second period much as the
University of Chicago symbolizes that of the first. A new wave of interest
in Simmel in the 1940s and 1950s was engendered by the teachings and
translations of a distinguished group of immigrants: Alfred Schutz and
Albert Salomon at the New School itself and, elsewhere in the country,
Reinhard Bendix, Lewis A. Coser, Hans Gerth, Gustav Ichheiser, Kurt
Lewin, and Kurt H. Wolff. Wolff’s translation of a substantial amount of
new material from the Simmelian corpus, published by the Free Press in
1950 as The Sociology of Georg Simmel, was more than any other single
factor responsible for the revival of American students’ interest in Simmel
in the postwar years. It was followed, in 1955, by the translation of two
more chapters of Soziologie by Wolff and Bendix (Simmel 1955).

By the end of this period, a baseline of “missionary” work on behalf of
1955-75: Codifying Traditions of Inquiry

During the early 1950s, Simmel was still regarded by many American
sociologists as a talented but archaic figure who could readily be dispensed
with in any properly scientific view of the discipline. This view was
buttressed by the fact that the most prestigious synthesis of major
developments in early 20th-century social theory, Parsons’s The Structure
of Social Action, concentrated on the works of Pareto, Durkheim, and
Weber, and did not include a section (written, but never published) on
Simmel. The impression given by this authoritative volume was that Sim-
mel was not a figure with whom serious students had to reckon.

That impression was shaken by a profusion of statements to the contrary
in the latter half of the decade. At that time American sociology was
starting to become more self-conscious: to codify its achievements, reassess
its past, and reconsider its theoretical orientations. These impulses were
reflected in a number of efforts to integrate Simmel into a more carefully
wrought reconstruction of the sociological tradition and to mine his works
for what appeared to contain a considerable untapped theoretical resource
for contemporary sociology.

In two year-long graduate seminars on the theory of organization
Merton and his students systematically combed Simmel’s sociology for
ideas germane to a codification of group properties. In personal communi-
cations about those seminars, Merton has written that they “focussed on
Simmel’s work as an indispensable point of departure for developing a
problematics of social structure and organization. . . . I had become con-
vinced . . . that there was much in Simmel that would lend itself to a style
of theorizing he himself could never bring himself to do.” Some of the
results of that inquiry were published in Merton’s lengthy chapter, ‘“Conti-
nuities in the Theory of Reference Groups and Social Structure,” in the
1957 edition of his Social Theory and Social Structure.

In the same year Donald N. Levine presented a dissertation entitled
“Simmel and Parsons: Two Approaches to the Study of Society” at the
University of Chicago. He maintained that Simmel’s approach remained
rich and fruitful, providing a sociology different from but complementary
to the orientation which Parsons had developed on foundations laid by
Pareto, Durkheim, and Weber.

Reprints of several of the Simmel translations were included in two
Simmel’s Influence on American Sociology. I

quickly accepted anthologies of sociological theory produced in 1956 and
1957.° Parsons himself contributed to the movement toward a revised
appreciation of Simmel by including five selections from Simmel in the
masterful anthology he edited with Shils, Naegele, and Pitts, Theories of
Society (1961).

Two publications designed to commemorate the centenary of Simmel’s
birth gave further notice that his sociology was still a challenge for
critical scholarship and a fertile source of stimuli for the sociological
imagination. The May 1958 special issue of the A/S, edited by Peter H.
Rossi, included a number of articles which sought to elaborate some of
Simmel’s key ideas. A commemorative volume, Georg Simmel, 1858-1918,
edited by Kurt H. Wolff and published by Ohio State University Press
the following year, contained exegetical articles as well as new translations
of Simmel’s essays. These were followed by a small but steady stream of
additional translations: the little monograph on religion (Simmel 1959),
further chapters from Soziologie and Philosophie des Geldes (Simmel
1971), and several of the philosophical essays (Simmel 1968, 1971).

A similar message was broadcast at the Durkheim-Simmel Centenary
Session of the American Sociological Association in 1958. Reversing the
harsh negative assessment of Simmel’s work he had expressed three decades
earlier, Theodore Abel (1959, p. 474) proclaimed that Simmel “could
justifiably be regarded as the founder of modern sociology” and suggested
that it had taken the many years of development in sociology since
Simmel’s death to enable the profession to appreciate his importance.
Robert A. Nisbet fully concurred with this reappraisal and added that
“of all the pioneers, Simmel is the most relevant at the present time”
(1959, p. 480).

By the 1960s Simmel’s work was being taught in numerous universities,
and one can no longer speak of one or a few special centers of diffusion.
Even so, the presence of both Coser and Wolff at Brandeis University
during that decade made its department a particularly favorable ambience
for the serious study of Simmel. One of the products of that milieu, Murray
A. Davis, has gone on to become a spirited advocate of what he considers
Simmel’s distinctive approach to sociology (Davis 1973).

Throughout this third period of diffusion there appeared efforts to
reinterpret the classical tradition of sociological theory in which Simmel
was accorded a more prominent place than ever before. Important syntheses
by Don Martindale (1960), Robert A. Nisbet (1966), and Lewis A. Coser
(1971) devoted considerable attention to Simmel’s place in the history of
social theory. Coser also produced a volume of choice selections from the
secondary literature on Simmel for the Prentice-Hall series, Makers of

9 Borgatta and Meyer (1966) reprinted four of the Small translations. Coser and
Rosenberg (1957) reprinted three of the Wolff translations.
It is one thing to admit an author’s work into a select list of classical
readings and another to utilize that work as a point of departure for
scientific inquiry. Received as a classic, the work becomes an intrinsically
valuable object: an exemplary specimen of intellectual creativity and a
statement about the human condition so rich and so deep that it rewards
the attention of each new generation. It seems fair to state that many of
Simmel’s sociological writings that have been translated into English have
attained the status of classics in the curriculum of higher learning in
America.

To assess the status of Simmel’s work as a source of stimuli for further
scientific inquiry is more problematic. There are many variations with
respect to both what has been incorporated and how it has been taken.
One must distinguish, in speaking of Simmel’s influence, among borrowings
that range from particular observations and specific hypotheses to general
theoretical orientations and the definition of significant problem areas.
In addition, one must take care to determine whether the borrowings are
real or only apparent; if real, whether direct or retrospective; if retro-
spective, whether they represent prediscoveries, anticipations, or merely
adumbrations.!°

In discussing the extent of Simmel’s influence we try to be mindful of
the latter sets of distinctions. As for the content to be considered, we deal,
in the next section, with general theoretical orientations and, in the
remaining sections, with those problem areas whose treatment by Simmel
appears to have had the greatest impact on American sociology: the

10 For clarification of the meanings and relationships of these concepts, and the
mandate to scholarship implicit in their use, see Merton (1968, chap. 1).
GENERAL THEORETICAL ORIENTATIONS

Even though Simmel failed to articulate all his sociological principles in a
systematic manner, his general position can be represented by the following
major assumptions: !

1, Sociology should restrict its inquiries to a precisely demarcated ter-
rain identified on the basis of a technically specific definition of its core
concept: society.

2. Society is to be viewed neither as a corporate entity distinct from and
exerting constraints upon individuals nor as an aggregation of corporate
entities such as classes and elites nor as an epiphenomenon reducible to
the motives and acts of individuals, but rather as the modality of inter-
action among individuals—the general process and particular processes of
Vergesellschaftung (which has been translated variously as societalization,
sociation, and association).

3. Individuals enter into interaction with one another (i.e., form
“society”) in order to satisfy such basic needs as those for companionship
and the expression of aggression and to pursue such goals as income,
territory, salvation, education, and the like. Individuals enter into inter-
action with only parts of themselves: an individual always stands both
within and outside social interaction.

4. The defining characteristic of interaction is reciprocity of effect: A
acts on B and in turn responds to B’s reaction to him. Interactions differ
with respect to the degree of symmetry of such reciprocity, but it is
always there to some extent. All human interactions should be viewed as
kinds of exchange.

5. Interactions take place in discrete identifiable forms, such as com-
petition, conflict, super- and subordination, and sociability, having deter-
minate properties that to some extent remain constant despite variations
in content, that is, in the purposes served by the interactions.

6. Interactions relate individuals who stand at varying distances from
one another. A major variable in forms of interaction thus concerns the
amounts and combinations of horizontal and vertical distance they entail.
This is distinct from what may be called the valence of interactions—
whether the affect in question is positive or negative.

7. Every tendency in interaction is to some extent balanced by an
opposing tendency. The fundamental dualism of social life stems both
from man’s ambivalent instinctual dispositions and from the need for

11 Earlier versions of these formulations of the basic principles of Simmel’s sociology
appear in Levine (1959; 1971, pp. xxxi-xliii).
American Journal of Sociology

some ratio of discordant to harmonious tendencies in order that society
may have a determinate shape. The principal sociological dualisms are
conformity and individuation, solidarity and antagonism, publicity and
privacy, compliance and rebelliousness, and constraint and freedom.

8. Cultural forms emerge in social interaction and become fixed. As
such, they stand in a relationship of perpetual tension with the ongoing
life processes, which bring about recurrent efforts to modify those forms
or create new ones.

Several efforts by American sociologists to construct a general theo-
retical framework reflect Simmel’s influence. They differ from one another
largely in the kinds of selections made from the eight principles just
presented. This selectivity has been based, for the most part, not on a
careful analysis of which of Simmel’s ideas appear viable and which not,
but on a relatively haphazard reading of his work. Owing to this careless-
ness, most of them either ignore other ideas of Simmel which are germane
to and should have been incorporated into their statements or deviate from
Simmel’s position without noting, let alone seeking to justify, the diver-
gence.

Although Introduction to the Science of Sociology was highly eclectic in
the best sense of the term, its central chapters articulate a coherent
theoretical orientation which must be quite what Park had in mind when
he wrote that Simmel was the man from whom he “finally gained a fun-
damental point of view for the study of . . . society.’ These chapters,
which contain the 10 selections by Simmel, fall into two parts. Chapters
4—7 treat the ways by which individuals move from isolation into contact
and then ongoing interaction and conceptualize the phenomenon of social
distance along lateral and vertical dimensions. Chapters 8-11 discuss the
four major interaction processes identified by Park: competition, conflict,
accommodation, and assimilation. The heart of the volume thus outlines
a program for sociology grounded on principles 5 and 6: a concern with
distance as the key dimension of society and with specific forms of
interaction as they appear in varying circumstances.1?

Regarding Simmel’s basic conception of society, however, Park’s position
is notably ambiguous. At some points he seems to follow Simmel in
equating society with human interaction, pure and simple—particularly
when he suggests that the “four great types of interaction” underlie the
four main types of “social order”: economic equilibrium (competition),
political order (conflict), social organization (accommodation), and
12 Guided by this theoretical orientation, Melvin Vincent, a student of Park’s student
Emory Bogardus, produced a dissertation (1928) entitled “A Study of Accommodation
as a Conscious Social Process Reflected in Employer and Employee Relationships.”
In it he states that “the sociology of this dissertation is based largely upon that of

Georg Simmel. The forms (processes) of interaction must be abstracted from the
complex phenomena (content) of social life.”
personality and the cultural heritage (assimilation) (Park and Burgess
1921, pp. 506-10). More characteristically, and especially in his later
work, however, Park leaned toward the more conventional identification
of the social with the moral order, which he contrasted with the ecological
order derived from the mere pursuit of individual self-interest. “Society,”
Park asserts, ‘“‘may be said to exist only so far as this independent activity
is controlled in the interest of the group as a whole” (Park and Burgess
1921, p. 508). Social control, then, became for Park and Burgess “the
central fact and the central problem of society’—not the normatively
indifferent phenomena of human association, as with Simmel—and soci-
ology ‘“‘a point of view and a method for investigating the processes by
which individuals are inducted into and induced to cooperate in some sort
of permanent corporate existence which we call society” (ibid., p. 42).

A more explicit attempt to build a general sociology on Simmelian
principles was made by Leopold von Wiese in his System der allgemeinen
Soziologie (1924-28). Howard Becker, who was an exchange fellow at
von Wiese’s institute in Cologne in the 1920s, undertook on returning to
the United States to work out an adapted and amplified version of that
monograph. It was published in 1932 as Systematic Sociology. In new
chapters written for the volume, Becker paid great tribute to Simmel for
having enunciated the first principle—the need to demarcate a scientific
terrain peculiar to sociology—and followed Simmel and von Wiese by
making that terrain the abstracted properties of “specifically interhuman”
phenomena.

Like Park and Burgess, von Wiese and Becker proceed from a discussion
of isolation and contact to a classification of interaction patterns. Three
sets of distinctions undergird Becker’s elaborate taxonomy. One is the
broad division of interhuman phenomena into action patterns of association
and dissociation, both categories to be subsumed under the inclusive
concept of sociation. The second distinction is between relationships and
processes, that is, the static aspect of sociation represented in terms of
distance and the dynamic aspect represented in terms of motion. A third
distinction separates elementary types of process or relationship called
“action patterns,” like adjustment, amalgamation, competition, and con-
flict, from structured clusters of relationships and processes called (un-
happily) “plurality patterns” (Simmel’s and von Wiese’s Gebdilde). In
addition, differentiation, integration, and “constructive and destructive
processes” are identified as special forms of association and dissociation:
the former differ from “common-human” patterns in that they take place
only within and between plurality patterns.

Becker’s adaptation of von Wiese was one of the most determined
attempts in American sociology to construct a general theory along lines
staked out by Simmel. Widely regarded as an uninspired work of taxon-
omy, the book had relatively little impact on sociology itself. Neverthe-
less, the basic idea of classifying social phenomena into basic processes of
association and dissociation subsequently became popular in several
branches of American social psychology.®

If Becker is to be viewed as a follower of Simmel, however, it should be
noted that he, like Park, failed to represent some of the most distinctive
features of Simmel’s conception of social conflict. By equating societal
order with the moral order produced by accommodation and assimilation,
Park came to see conflict as a source of disruption and necessary change,
thus neglecting Simmel’s emphasis on the ways in which conflict, as
routinized antagonism, serves also to constitute and stabilize social order.
Like Simmel, however, Park did see conflict as a process which brought
people into closer contact, whereas Becker classified conflict and ‘“contra-
vention” as forms of dissociation—directed, that is, toward avoidance and
away from social contact.

Since World War II a number of scattered efforts to crystallize a
general orientation in sociology have been made by authors seeking to
revive and extend Simmel’s approach. One such effort has been animated
chiefly by devotion to the second principle: the conception of society
as interaction process as the fundamentally appropriate image for socio-
logical inquiry. Proponents of this line of thought have found it worth-
while to return to Simmel’s own point of departure in developing the
notion, that is, to an explicit repudiation both of organismic models of
society and of models which reduce society to purely individual phenomena
and their mechanical interactions.

Werner Stark argues that these models repudiated by Simmel have been
the dominant metaphors for society in Western intellectual history and
suggests why they have continuously reappeared despite the patent flaws
of each. Although he faults Simmel for lack of consistency on the question,
Stark writes that Simmel was “the thinker who, perhaps more ably than
any other, drew the necessary conclusions from the fact . . . that both
philosophical realism [organicist] and philosophical nominalism [mech-
anist] are inappropriate in sociological theory.” Stark concludes that
“what we must above all retain out of Simmel’s far-flung investigations is,
of course, his definition of society. This, as we have seen already, is simple
enough. ‘Society exists where several individuals enter into interaction.’
. . . Nothing could be more elementary and nothing more true” (1963,
pp. 213, 216).

A similar argument was set forth by Hugh Duncan, urging that society
be viewed as a process of communication: “Following Simmel, we argue
that the study of society is the study of the forms of sociation. But we
argue further—and here our clue is supplied by Mead and Burke—that
the data of sociation exist in the various kinds of symbolic expressions
men use to enact their social roles in communication with one another”
(1962, p. xvii).

Independently of both Stark and Duncan, Walter Buckley has used
a more elaborate technical vocabulary to make essentially the same point.
Urging American sociologists to abandon “outmoded” conceptions of
society predicated on mechanical equilibrium models and organismic
homeostatic models, Buckley advocates a model incorporating general
systems research, cybernetics, and information and communication theories.
Its main feature would be an emphasis on process—“‘a move down from
structure to social interrelations and from social relations to social actions
and interaction processes” (1968, p. 499)—and on the continuous activity
by which complex adaptive systems create new forms in response to
changing conditions.

Buckley gives Simmel credit for anticipating the basic thrust of a
“process” model. After criticizing modern sociological theory for being
dominated by mechanical-organismic models with their overemphasis on
fixed structures, he notes that “mention should be made of the ‘process’
model, which was a predominant point of view in American sociology of
the early twentieth century under the leadership especially of the ‘Chicago
school,’ including, in particular, Albion W. Small, G. H. Mead, R. E. Park
and W. E. Burgess, who in turn were stimulated by such German soci-
ologists as G. Simmel and L. von Wiese” (1967, p. 17). Buckley observes

that “though Simmel and others

ocused on ‘forms’ of interaction, their

emphasis was always on the interaction as process rather than on the

‘forms’ ” (ibid., p. 19). In Buckley
can be considered a genuine antici

*s view, this earlier emphasis on process
ation of the basic principles of cyber-

netics. What he fails to appreciate is that the other phenomenon he em-

 

phasizes, the “morphogenic” pro

erties of sociocultural systems, was

stressed no less heavily by Simmel. Presented as the eighth principle in our
outline, the significance of continual morphogenesis was a major theme
in Simmel’s later writings.

Recent work on a general theory of social exchange has been in a
similar vein. Stressing Simmel’s fourth principle more than the abstract
conception of society as process, its productions have been more substan-
tively focused. Contributors to it represent diverse research traditions,
some linked to Simmel, others not. A major force behind this development
came from the efforts of various scholars in the 1930s and later to study
the properties of directly observed transactions in small groups. That
movement was to some extent given cohesion and greater visibility by
George C. Homans in The Human Group. Although Homans did not
acknowledge or utilize Simmel’s work in that volume, an intellectual
affinity is suggested in the introduction by Merton, who wrote: ‘Not since
Simmel’s pioneering analyses of almost half a century ago has any single
work contributed so much to a sociological theory of the structure, pro-
cesses, and functioning of small groups as George Homans’ The Human
Group” (Homans 1950, p. xxiii).

In work published a decade later, Homans modified his approach in
two ways: he shifted from the study of small groups to the more abstract
phenomenon of elementary social behavior and from a classification of
descriptive accounts of interaction systems to a generalized explanatory
theory of human exchange. In doing so, he found it necessary to derive
the theoretical grounding for Social Behavior: Its Elementary Forms
(1961) from disciplines outside sociology: behavioral psychology and
elementary economics.

Stimulated by Homans’s work, Peter M. Blau sought to advance the
general theory of social exchange in ways that took account of emergent
social structural properties and rooted the theory more firmly within
sociology. Blau began by establishing a link with “the theoretical tradition
of Simmel.” In a chapter entitled “The Structure of Social Associations,”
he wrote: “To speak of social life is to speak of the associations between
people. . . . Simmel’s fundamental postulate, and also that of this book, is
that the analysis of social associations, of the processes governing them,
and of the forms they assume is the central task of sociology. The title of
this first chapter can be considered a free translation of Simmel’s basic
concept, ‘Die Formen der Vergesellschaftung’ ” (1964, p. 12).

Thanks to the creative work of Homans and Blau, “exchange theory”
quickly assumed a prominent position in American sociology. This was
much like what happened with “conflict theory,” largely in response to
Lewis Coser’s (1956) critical codification of Simmel’s essay on conflict.
Indeed, conflict and exchange theories soon came to be presented as al-
ternative if not competitive perspectives in standard courses and textbooks
on sociological theory.

For Simmel, however, conflict and exchange were simply two intimately
related general forms of interaction—a point which Walter L. Wallace is
one of very few recent theorists to have grasped. Wallace complements
Blau’s perception that exchange processes generate power differentials
which in turn stimulate forces promoting opposition and cleavage with
Simmel’s perception that peaceful exchange is often a substitute for conflict.
For such reasons, Wallace argues that “conflict theory” is logically a vari-
ant of “exchange theory,” concerned with the exchange of injuries rather
than of benefits (1969, pp. 31-34).

Other efforts to shape “new” orientations in American sociology have
been stimulated by somewhat different aspects of Simmel’s thought.
Simmel is frequently invoked to legitimate and provide insights for a
Simmel’s Influence on American Sociology. I

“sociology of everyday life” carried on by proponents of what have been
called phenomenological and ethnomethodological approaches to sociology
and social psychology. In this endeavor, the third principle mentioned
above is often stressed: the idea that individuals actively construct their
social relationships and are never wholly absorbed by them. In a number
of brilliant studies in this genre, Erving Goffman has drawn fruitfully on
Simmel’s work at many points. Alfred Schutz served to mediate between
Simmel (as well as Husserl) and a recent group of sociologists of everyday
life which includes Harold Garfinkel, Aaron Cicourel, and Jack Douglas.
In this vein, Stanford Lyman and Marvin Scott have propounded A
Sociology of the Absurd (1970), for which Simmel is called second only to
Machiavelli as a precursor.

Of all the basic ideas informing Simmel’s social thought, that which has
received the least attention in American sociology is the seventh principle:
the conception of the fundamentally dualistic character of social life.
We know of only one instance in which Simmel’s dualistic mode of analysis
was cited as exemplary, the brief invitation for sociologists to think ex-
plicitly in terms of pairs of opposed concepts which Reinhard Bendix and
Bennett Berger issued in 1959. It was little heeded.
by his remark that “the emancipated Jew was, and is, historically and
typically the marginal man . . . he is, par excellence, the ‘stranger,’ whom
Simmel, himself a Jew, has described with such profound insight and
understanding” (Park 1928, p. 892; reprinted in Park 1950). Commenting
on this adaptation, Boskoff recently observed that “Park borrowed the
concept of the stranger [from Simmel] and applied it to the phenomena of
migration and culture contact in complex society. Briefly, Park suggested
that various kinds of deviant behavior (crime, delinquency, illegitimacy)
reflected the experience of persons who, by migrating, had given up old
values but had not adequately acquired the norms and skills of their new
setting” (1969, pp. 282-83).

It should be clear, however, that in the borrowing Park altered the
shape of the concept: his “marginal man” represents a configuration
notably different from Simmel’s “stranger.”’ Thinking of the experience of
ethnic minorities in zones of culture contact in American cities, Park
conceived the marginal man as a racial or cultural hybrid—‘“one who lives
in two worlds, in both of which he is more or less of a stranger’”—one who
aspires to but is excluded from full membership in a new group. Simmel’s
stranger, by contrast, does not aspire to be assimilated; he is a potential
wanderer, one who “has not quite got over the freedom of coming and
going.” Whereas Park’s excluded marginal man was depicted as suffering
from spiritual instability, intensified self-consciousness, restlessness, and
malaise, Simmel’s stranger, occupying a determinate position in relation
to the group, was depicted as a successful trader, a judge, a confidant, and
a personally attractive human being.

In an extended study of The Marginal Man (1937), Park’s student,
Everett V. Stonequist, indicated his awareness that Park’s marginal man
was not identical with Simmel’s stranger. He observed, first, that margin-
ality need not be produced by migration but could also come about
through internal changes like education and marriage. More explicitly,
he stated: “The stranger, Simmel writes, first appears as a trader, one
who is not fixed in space, yet settles for a time in the community—a
‘potential wanderer.’ He unites in his person the qualities of ‘nearness and
remoteness, concern and indifference.’ . . . This conception of the stranger
pictures him as one who is not intimately and personally concerned with
the social life about him. His relative detachment frees him from the self-
consciousness, the concern for status, and the divided loyalties of the
marginal man” (1937, pp. 177-78; italics ours). Stonequist went on to
note that the distinctive properties of the stranger identified by Simmel are
lost if an individual moves into the position of being a marginal person.

In spite of Stonequist’s clarity, a tendency to confuse the marginal man
with Simmel’s stranger has persisted. Thus, more than a decade later,
Hughes (1949) uncritically repeated Park’s view that Simmel’s passages
on the stranger referred to the same phenomenon as the marginal man.
Boskoff, with comparable carelessness, glossed Simmel’s stranger as
“vulnerable to internal uncertainties” (1969, p. 282). Seeking to “re-
examine the ubiquitous concept of ‘marginal man,’” Peter I. Rose did so
by asking “how the ‘stranger’ in the midst of alien territory adapts to
community life.” After interviewing exurban Jews in several small towns
of upstate New York, Rose concluded that their position could be described
more aptly as one of duality than as one of marginality; for they felt “we
have the best of both.” Rose considered his findings to provide evidence
against the applicability of the concept of marginality and to refute the
view of “Stonequist [sic], Park and others who have characterized the
Jew as a disturbed marginal man, an eternal stranger [here Rose footnotes
Simmel! ] unable to reconcile the traditions of his people with the counter-
forces of the majority world” (1967, p. 472). In making this point, Rose,
like Hughes and Boskoff, was misreading Simmel through Park’s distorting
lens. What he in fact found was that the Jews in question were not ade-
quately characterized by Park’s concept of marginality but that they might
indeed be characterized in terms of Simmel’s concept of the stranger.

If Stonequist’s distinction between marginality and strangerhood was
made only to be lost, it was inadvertently recovered by Paul C. P. Siu.
In his investigation of Chinese laundrymen in Chicago, originally carried
out as a study of “marginality,” Siu was dismayed to find that “none of the
Chinese laundrymen I studied could be considered a marginal man.” Siu,
however, did not use his findings to invalidate Simmel’s concept of the
stranger. Instead, he returned to Simmel to raise the question whether the
marginal man might not more aptly be viewed as one of a number of
variant types of stranger. Siu then proposed a new type, the sojourner—
who, in contrast to the bicultural complex of the marginal man, clings to
the culture of his own ethnic group—and added a few notes on still
another type of stranger, the settler (Siu 1952). The way was thus opened
for a more differentiated view of phenomena previously lumped together
under the diffuse categories of strangerhood or marginality.

A related step, albeit in a different direction, had been taken around
the time of Stonequist’s study. Margaret Mary Wood’s The Stranger: A
Study in Social Relationships (1934) drew freely on Simmel but adopted
a definition of the stranger that was clearly differentiated from Simmel’s:
“We shall describe the stranger as one who has come into face-to-face
contact with the group for the first time. This concept is broader than that
of Simmel, who defines the stranger as ‘the man who comes today and
stays tomorrow, the potential wanderer, who although he has gone no
further, has not quite got over the freedom of coming and going.’ For us
the stranger may be, as with Simmel, a potential wanderer, but he may
also be a wanderer who comes today and goes tomorrow, or he may come
today and remain with us permanently” (pp. 43-44).

In other words, Wood’s topic was not the sojourner but the newly
arrived outsider, and her concern was with those internal changes through
which different types of groups adapt to his arrival in their midst. Her
work might have laid the groundwork for an extensive sociology of the
stranger in which Simmel’s formulations might properly have been under-
stood as referring to a specialized social type; but, as McLemore (1970)
stresses in a spirited review of some of the voluminous literature related to
Simmel’s essay, subsequent sociologists of the stranger tended to cite
Simmel as a primary point of reference for the general topic and, even
when citing Wood, tended to miss the distinction between Wood’s newly
arrived outsider and Simmel’s stranger. Thus Julian Greifer, in a suggestive
reconstruction of the evolution of attitudes toward the stranger in ancient
Judaism, defines the stranger as one who “has come into face to face
contact with the group for the first time,” and in the next sentence refers
to this stranger “as described by Georg Simmel” (1945, p. 739; italics
ours). Similarly, Oscar Grusky (1960) confuses the newly arrived with
Simmel’s stranger by using the latter concept in describing the position
of a newcomer in a line of administrative succession.

In this context it is instructive to examine an experimental study which
claims to draw inspiration from Simmel, “The Stranger in Laboratory
Culture” by Nash and Wolfe (1957). In a series of experiments in which
a Rorschach card stimulus was presented to small groups of subjects over a
number of “epochs,” Nash and Wolfe sought to create a role which
“would seem to approximate in the laboratory Simmel’s description of the
stranger.” The hypothesis they tested, however, sprang from the ideas of
Park, Stonequist, and others concerning the peculiar creativity of the
marginal man. What they found was that the “strangers” proved to be less
innovative than other participants in the experiment.

The weakness of this study is that it rests on a double conceptual con-
fusion. It seeks to verify Simmel’s formulations about the stranger by using
hypotheses devised, not by Simmel, but by others concerned with a
different social type, the marginal man; and to do so by constructing an
experimental role modeled, not on Simmel’s stranger, but on the still differ-
ent type of the newly arrived. Nash and Wolfe were led by their unexpected
findings to draw a distinction between persons socialized in a marginal
situation and persons introduced into such a situation briefly as adults.
The distinction seems useful and broadly parallels the distinctions noted
above between the marginal man and the newly arrived—neither of which,
it should be clear, replicates Simmel’s own concept of the stranger.

In a study more faithful to Simmel’s formulations, “Aggressive Attitudes
Simmel’s Influence on American Sociology. I

of the ‘Stranger’ as a Function of Conformity Pressures,” Robert Zajonc
(1952) has in effect recovered the distinction between the stranger and
the newly arrived. Linking Simmel’s ideas about the stranger’s relative
independence from local customs with frustration-aggression theory, Zajonc
hypothesizes, first, that insofar as strangers are expected to conform to
host culture norms and find that expectation disturbing because of con-
flicts with values brought from their home culture, they will tend to
express aggression against those norms; and that such criticism is facili-
tated by their unique position as strangers in the host society and further
reduces the need to conform by devaluing the norms in question. “This
relationship,” Zajonc notes, “hinges upon the unique role of the stranger,
and it consequently cannot be expected to hold for the newly arrived.”
His second hypothesis, then, is that “attitudinal aggression as a result
of frustration in conformity will be greater for strangers with long
residence [Simmel’s ‘stranger’] than for those with short residence [the
‘newly arrived’|.” That hypothesis is supported by his findings.

The studies thus far cited indicate the wide range of responses to Sim-
mel’s essay on strangerhood and the fruitfulness of moving toward a more
differentiated conception of the modalities of group affiliation. Whether
imagined as discrete types or as reflecting variations in such dimensions
as length of residence and desire for assimilation, concepts like those of
the marginal man, the sojourner, and the newly arrived suggest the rich-
ness of the vein struck by Simmel’s “Der Fremde.”

A number of other studies, however, have stayed much closer to the
terrain marked out by Simmel himself. Defining the stranger much as
Simmel did, they have used his essay to raise questions about a number
of homologous phenomena.

Broadly speaking, these studies are of two kinds. Some are aimed at
determining the properties of stranger communities. Extending Simmel’s
remarks on the stranger type to such similarly situated immigrant com-
munities as the Chinese in Southeast Asia, Asians in East Africa, Armenians
in Turkey, Syrians in West Africa, Parsis in India, and Japanese in the
United States, as well as Jews in Europe, they seek to articulate both the
internal organization and orientations of the stranger minority groups and
their relations with the host societies. In Immigrants and Associations, for
example, Lloyd A. Fallers assembled a collection of papers on Chinese,
Lebanese, and Ibo immigrant communities. Introducing them with a
lengthy excerpt from Simmel’s “excellent little essay on ‘The Stranger,’ ”
Fallers goes on to note that “Simmel here draws our attention to a fact
often ignored by social scientists: human societies are very often culturally
heterogeneous, not for ‘historically accidental’ or ‘exceptional’ reasons, but
because they ‘need’ to be. . . . The essays in this volume are all concerned
with one particular source of cultural diversity—the source Simmel had in
mind particularly in the above passage: that is, the culturally alien com-
munity resulting from migration in pursuit of economic opportunity.”
From the several papers in the volume Fallers observes that the stranger
communities exhibit a typical pattern: “a socially segregated and hostilely-
regarded community of kinship units, knit together and defended by as-
sociational ties” (1967, pp. 8, 12-13).

Edna Bonacich (1973), in “A Theory of Middleman Minorities,” seeks
to account for the development and persistence of this relational form. The
process consists of two stages. First, the immigrants settle in a new terri-
tory as sojourners, with the expectation of eventually returning to their
homeland. This orientation favors their economic liquidity and social
solidarity, traits which elicit pronounced hostility from the host society.
This hostility in turn perpetuates their identification with their homeland,
leading, for those who cannot or do not return, to a second mode of ad-
justment, marked by a persisting ambivalence toward the new place of
residence that makes them equivalent to the stranger type described by
Simmel.

In a second kind of study, Simmel’s propositions have been extended to
other individual types bearing a formal resemblance to the stranger. One
trait which Simmel asserted to be characteristic of the stranger, enhanced
objectivity, has figured in a number of discussions of the nature of social
knowledge. Park and Burgess were clearly mindful of this issue; following
Simmel’s essay, they posed for discussion the question “In what sense is
the attitude of the academic man that of ‘the stranger’ as compared with
the attitude of the practical man?” (1921, p. 338). Arlene Daniels has dealt
with one aspect of this question by discussing the costs and benefits of
carrying out social research in a relationship that maximizes the stranger-
like traits of the sociologist. If one enters a group as a visibly alien ob-
server, she writes, “the stranger in this instance encounters a situation
fraught with all the opportunities for confidence and intimacies which
Simmel describes” (1967, p. 267). Dennison Nash, in “The Ethnologist as
Stranger” (1963), points out that the stranger’s position is not necessarily
conducive to cognitive objectivity. His role is beset by ambiguities and
inconsistencies which can produce a degree of anxiety that will constrict
or even disorganize his perception. Whether or not constrictive perceptual
reactions occur depends on such factors as the compatibility of home and
host cultures, the stranger’s treatment by the hosts, his relative power, the
presence or absence of an enclave, and his own potential for adaptation.
Considering this last parameter, Nash reviews a small set of data on
American anthropologists and concludes that they tend to be “autonomous”
rather than “authoritarian” personalities, a finding which implies that they
are likely to be adaptive to the role of the stranger and therefore able to
cope with field conditions without serious perceptual distortion.
Variations on Simmel’s theme that strangers lack the social attachments
and moral obligations common to members of the host society appear in a
series of imaginatively conceived papers in historical sociology by Lewis
A. Coser. Noting that “what Georg Simmel said about the stranger applies
with peculiar force to the eunuch: ‘He is not radically committed to the
unique ingredients and peculiar tendencies of the group,’ ” Coser (1964)
argues that the detachment of the eunuch-stranger from all group involve-
ments makes him an ideal instrument for carrying out the ruler’s subjective
desires, in contrast with bureaucratic officials who exercise considerable
constraint upon the ruler’s power. In a subsequent paper Coser (1972)
extended the point to deal with uncastrated but politically impotent aliens,
as illustrated by the court Jews of Baroque Germany and by Christian
renegades who served Ottoman sultans. In addition, Coser (1958, 1965)
has applied the insight about the stranger’s unconventionality to the
biography of Simmel himself, attributing the increased production of un-
conventional publications and lectures during the latter part of Simmel’s
career to the fact that he was indeed a “stranger” in the German academy
of his time.

In view of the foregoing, by no means exhaustive, survey, we find it
easy to assent to the statement with which McLemore (1970) concludes
his critique of the literature on Simmel’s stranger: ‘Sociologists would be
fortunate indeed if more of their concepts were as productive as the
‘stranger.’ ”
American Journal of Sociology

“Social distance” became a prominent concept in American sociology in
the 1920s owing to the convergence of a felt need to understand the rela-
tions among racial groups in the United States, made especially acute by
the influx of large numbers of Orientals and by the hunger of a young
scientific discipline for concepts that would lend themselves to quantitative
measurement. In the papers by Park (1924) and Bogardus (1925) which
launched this research tradition, Simmel was not mentioned. However,
Park and Burgess had called attention previously (1921, p. 286) to the fact
that, in his essay on the stranger, “Simmel himself employs the conception
of social distance in his [identification of the form] of the stranger as the
combination of the near and the far.” And Bogardus, ruminating on three
decades of research on the subject in Social Distance (1959, p. 13), cites
Simmel’s use of “the terms nearness and remoteness in his discussion of
‘the stranger’ ” in the book’s first footnote. In any case, it is widely believed
that, as Charles Kadushin has put it, Bogardus’s social distance scale
“made Simmel’s notions of social distance more concrete” (1962, p. 519)—
in other words, converted the concept into a variable that could be
measured.

The Bogardus scale was designed to measure attitudes reflecting the
degrees of “sympathetic understanding” which respondents had to members
of other groups. The scale was extensively utilized and was largely re-
sponsible for the widespread diffusion of the concept. If, however, as
Bogardus observed in 1959, “within the last thirty years, the concept of
social distance [became] widely accepted in sociology,” there is no warrant
for the eulogy he appends to that observation: “[Social distance] is a
crisp term which conveys its own meaning. It says exactly what it means.
It is rarely if ever misunderstood” (p. 7). On the contrary—the literature
from those three decades and later ones reveals a continuous unfolding,
confusing, disentangling, and crosscutting of several disparate meanings of
social distance.

The complexity of this development would not have surprised Simmel,
whose own expressed view was that “very manifold meanings [are] encom-
passed by the symbol of ‘distance’ ” (1908, p. 321; 1955, p. 105). The point
is illustrated by the Bogardus scale itself, if it is to be seen as a means
of making Simmel’s notions of social distance more concrete: it captures
none of the meanings Simmel had in mind when alluding to social space
in “The Stranger,” which dealt rather with (1) ecological attachment and
mobility, (2) emotional involvement and detachment, and (3) the extent
to which persons share similar qualities and sentiments. Proceeding in yet
another direction, Sorokin, who cites Simmel as the first modern sociologist
to attend to the problem of social space and related questions, defines social
distance in terms of the constellation of a person’s group memberships
and his positions in those groups. He contrasts this “objective and socio-
logical” approach with that of Park and Bogardus, which he calls “purely
psychological and subjective (as far as it measures the social distance by
the subjective feelings of liking and disliking)” (1927, chap. 1).

A number of other authors have sought to specify the concept of social
distance anew by returning to parts of Simmel’s work other than “The
Stranger.” Willard Poole (1927), erroneously thanking Park and Burgess
for the transmission, drew on a (then untranslated) passage in Simmel’s
chapter “The Poor” to ground a distinction between social distance
(hierarchical position) and personal distance (emotional involvement),
then evolved a fourfold classification by identifying “subjective” and
“objective” forms of both social and personal distance. Erving Goffman
(1959, p. 69) drew on a passage from Simmel’s discussion of secrecy to
develop another meaning: the radius of a sphere around a person which
marks the distance at which others must stand back. Charles Kadushin
cited a passage from Simmel’s chapter “Quantitative Aspects of the Group”
to produce still another meaning of the concept, averring that “when Sim-
mel first introduced the notion of social distance” he used it to distinguish
emotional involvement from cool detachment (1962, p. 517).

Much of the recent work on social distance has been devoted to sorting
out some of the “very manifold meanings” of the concept and to devising
correspondingly diverse instruments of measurement. Westie (1952, 1953)
developed four different social distance scales (residential distance, position
distance, interpersonal physical distance, and interpersonal interaction
distance). Banton (1960) distinguished four forms of social distance
(attitudinal, positional, qualitative, and ecological [labels ours]). Ka-
dushin, in his “effort to re-specify and apply Simmel’s ideas,” distinguishes
still another set of four “dimensions of social distance” (and the relevant
indicators needed to tap them): “Normative distance refers to the manner
and degree of interaction which ought to hold between two or more persons
or statuses. /nteractive distance is the degree of actual interaction and
need not match the normative prescription. . . . Cultural or valuational
distance is the degree of value homophyly that exists between two persons
or statuses. .. . Personal distance or empathy is the degree of understanding
and unspoken communication that takes place between two persons or two
statuses—what Simmel had in mind when he wrote of ‘personal’ relation-
ships” (1962, pp. 519-20).

Perhaps the most rigorous and ambitious work in this research tradition
is that of Edward O. Laumann. Concerned that “although Simmel at the
turn of the century suggested the promise of research on interaction,
remarkably little systematic research in urban settings . . . has been under-
taken,” Laumann (1966, p. 147) has undertaken major efforts to carry
out such research in a systematic manner. He has created instruments to
measure both subjective social distance (‘an attitude of ego toward a
person ... that broadly defines the character of the interaction ego would
be willing to undertake with the attitude object”), the variable tapped
by the Bogardus scale, and objective social distance (“the actually observed
differential association of persons of different status attributes in various
social relationships”) (Laumann 1966, pp. 29-30). He has used these
instruments to provide a more empirically grounded understanding of
the interaction patterns of social classes in urban communities.

In an appendix to Laumann’s most recent work in this vein, David
McFarland and Daniel Brown (1973) return to Simmel as a point of
departure for developing a rigorous conception of social distance as a
“metric,” a term used by mathematicians to denote a type of quantity
that bears a resemblance to physical distance. Their remarks are essentially
negative:

Simmel’s discussion of social distance concerned “The Stranger,” whom
he described as having elements of both nearness and distance. The near-
ness comes from features held in common with the observer, and the
distance comes from the observer’s awareness that the features held in
common are common to all men or at least to large groups of men.
Simmel’s use of the concept does not lend itself either to quantification
or to a clear analogy with physical distance since in his usage two people
can simultaneously be “near” and “distant.” His concept of social dis-
tance actually seems to be a mixture of two different concepts: features
held in common, and the degree of specificity or generality of these com-
mon features. . . . Simmel made no attempt to quantify his idea of social
distance, or to represent it geometrically as the distance between physical
points. [P. 215]

Taking up the challenge implicit in their critique of Simmel, McFarland
and Brown propose, through the use of such constructs as “proximity
measures” and “relative distance,” a set of operations capable of yielding
both a social distance function that is a true metric and a dimensional
representation of the objects in question that discloses the configuration
formed by the set of objects.

The great promise which McFarland and Brown sensed in the metaphor
of social distance—that social relations could somehow be represented in
mathematical terms in a way that bears some resemblance to the measure-
ment of physical space—had been responded to in other ways within a
different research tradition, that of sociometry. Workers in this field
developed such constructs as choice and rejection status indices to rep-
resent social distances within small groups in mathematical form. Com-
menting on this earlier development, J. L. Moreno wrote: “Although
certain aspects of sociometry and microsociology had already been con-
ceptualized by Simmel, von Wiese, Gurvitch, and myself in Europe, it is
still a genuine American movement because it would have died there,
whereas here it flowered to great productivity. More than any other living
variety of the human species, the American man loves to express status
in figures, he is the ‘homo metrum’” (1960, p. vii).

At several points, then, the work of Simmel provided some stimulation
for American sociologists seeking to find ways and means of applying
metric techniques to social relations. In the process, however, much of Sim-
mel’s own message was lost. How much was lost may be surmised from a
close consideration of the assertions by McFarland and Brown quoted
above.

Theirs is a distorted reading of Simmel’s discussion of social distance
because it is based on a biased sample of his statements. While Simmel did
to some extent consider “nearness” in terms of features held in common—
what McFarland and Brown call a “similarity” notion of social distance,
comparable to what Lazarsfeld and Merton (1954) have referred to as
“value homophily”—he also employed what they call an “interaction”
notion of social distance. Simmel’s description of the nearness of the
stranger clearly refers in part to the fact that the stranger is someone close
by with whom interactions are readily experienced, and his allusions to
social distance in other contexts make even greater use of the interactional
(and still other) meanings of the concept.

Much more misleading, however, is the statement that Simmel made no
attempt to represent social distance geometrically. Here homo metrum
has denatured the European legacy. Sociology was explicitly conceived by
Simmel as a kind of geometry of social relations. Distance, however, was
a central analytic concept for him, not because social phenomena might
therewith be measured univocally,!® but because the properties of physical
space figure significantly in the symbolic structures through which human
actors define, interpret, and organize their social relations.1* He spent no
time looking for a literal social counterpart to physical space, since social
distance was a metaphor only:

At the moment two persons begin to interact, the space between them
appears to be filled and inhabited. This appearance of course rests only
on the ambiguity of the concept “between”: that a relation between two
elements which actually consists only of a certain movement or modifica-
tion within the one and the other takes place between them in the sense
of a spatial interposition. Although the ambiguity in question may give
rise to errors, it represents a matter of quite profound sociological sig-
nificance. The “Inbetween” as a purely functional reciprocity, whose
contents stay within each of the parties to a transaction, also takes the
form of a claim on the space which exists between these parties, actually
manifesting itself in all cases between two spatial locations at which each
party has a specially designated place, one to be occupied by himself
alone. [Simmel 1908, p. 616, as translated by D. Levine]

It remains for other research traditions within American sociology to
appreciate that the principal relevance of the essay on the stranger for the
study of social distance may lie in its second sentence: “[The example of
the stranger] is another indication that spatial relations not only are
determining conditions of relationships among men, but are also symbolic
of those relationships.”
TABLE A2

Foreicn Sociotocists Most FREQUENTLY MENTIONED AS INFLUENTIAL

 

 

Author Respondents

 

 

   

H. Spencer .... 23
G. SIMMEL . 12
G. Tarde .. 11
E, Durkheim . 7
L. Hobhouse 7
A. Comte ......... 6
TABLE B1

DIFFERENTIAL CITATIONS OF AUTHORS

 

 

AMERICAN AUTHORS

European AUTHORS

 

 

    
  

  

 

 

 

  

 

 
  
 

 

 

   

 
 
   
   

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

  
     
 

  
  

Author Citations Author Citations
Case 1924
30 Spencer 20
22 Comte 10
21 Hobhouse 6
14 Durkheim 3
Giddings 14 Marx 3
Small 14
Park .. 13
Sumner 13 Tonnies, or Weber)
Ellwood 1925
Giddings 22 Hobhouse 18
Park and Burgess 18 Comte 8
Ross ..... 15 Marx ... 2
Cooley . 13 SIMMEL 2
Ward . 10 Spencer 2
Small . 6 Tarde . oer 2
Sumner 4 (One cit im, none for
Pareto, Ténnies, Weber)
Lumley 1928
Sumner 31 Spencer 9
Keller . 23 Hobhouse 3
Park .. 18 SIMMEL 3
Ross .. 14 Tarde .. are 2
Cooley .. 7 (No citation r e, Durkheim,
Giddings 6 Marx, Pareto, Tonnies, Weber)
Dawson and Gettys 1929
Park .... 49 SIMMEL 14
Cooley 31 Durkheim . 10
Burgess 28 Westermarck . 7
Thomas .. 25 Spencer 5
Sumner 16 Tarde .. 3
Ross .. 15 Comte oer 2
Small 14 (One citation for Hobhouse, none for
Znaniecki ... 13 Marx, Pareto, Tonnies, Weber)
Hiller 1933
Park .. 56 Hobhouse 34
Thomas . 50 Westermarck . 33
Cooley .. 49 SIMMEL 14
Sumner 47 Tarde .... 7
Burgess 44 Spencer c 3
Sorokin . 37 Durkheim ........ oer 2
Znaniecki 37 (No citations for Comte, Marx, Toén-
Ross 33 nies, Pareto, Weber)
Abel, Theodore. 1929. Systematic Sociology in Germany. New York: Columbia Uni-
versity Press.

. 1959. “The Contribution of Georg Simmel: A Reappraisal.” American Socio-
logical Review 24 (August): 473-79.

Baker, Paul J. 1973. “The Life Histories of W. I. Thomas and Robert E. Park with
an Introduction by Paul J. Baker.” American Journal of Sociology 79 (September) :
243-60.

Baker, Paul J., Martha P. Long, and Susan L. Quesnel. 1973. “The Pioneers of
American Sociology: An Empirical Analysis.” Paper presented at the Annual
Meetings of the American Sociological Association, New York, August.

Bales, Robert F. 1950. Interaction Process Analysis. Cambridge, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.

Banton, Michael. 1960. “Social Distance: A New Appreciation.” Sociological Review
8 (December): 169-83.

Bendix, Reinhard, and Bennett Berger. 1959. “Images of Society and Problems of
Concept Formation in Sociology.” Pp. 92-118 in Symposium on Sociological Theory,
edited by Llewellyn Gross. New York: Harper & Row.

Blau, Peter M. 1964. Exchange and Power in Social Life. New York: Wiley.

Bogardus, Emory S. 1959. Social Distance. Yellow Springs, Ohio: Antioch.

Bonacich, Edna. 1973. “A Theory of Middleman Minorities.” American Sociological
Review 38 (October): 583-94.

Borgatta, Edgar F., and Henry J. Meyer, eds. 1966. Sociological Theory: Present-Day
Sociology from the Past. New York: Knopf.

Boskoff, Alvin. 1969. Theory in American Sociology. New York: Crowell.

Bradburn, Norman M., and David Caplovitz. 1965. Reports on Happiness. Chicago:
Aldine.

Buckley, Walter. 1967. Sociology and Modern Systems Theory. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
Prentice-Hall.

. 1968. Modern Systems Research for the Behavioral Scientist. Chicago: Aldine.

Case, C. M. 1924. Outlines of Introductory Sociology. New York: Harcourt Brace.

Cory, David, ed. 1955. The Letters of George Santayana. New York: Scribner’s.

Coser, Lewis A. 1956. The Functions of Social Conflict. New York: Free Press.

. 1958. “Georg Simmel’s Style of Work: A Contribution to the Sociology of the

Sociologist.” American Journal of Sociology 63. (May): 635-41.

. 1964. “The Political Functions of Eunuchism.” American Sociological Review

29 (December): 880-85.

. 1965. “The Stranger in the Academy.” Pp. 29-39 in Georg Simmel, edited by

Lewis A. Coser. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

. 1971. Masters of Sociological Thought. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

. 1972. “The Alien as a Servant of Power: Court Jews and Christian Renegades.”
American Sociological Review 37 (October): 574-81.

Coser, Lewis A., and Bernard Rosenberg. 1957. Sociological Theory: A Book of Read-
ings. New York: Macmillan.

Daniels, Arlene Kaplan. 1967. “The Low-Caste Stranger in Social Research.” Pp. 267—
96 in Ethics, Politics, and Social Research, edited by Gideon Sjoberg. Cambridge,
Mass.: Schenkman.

Davis, Murray S. 1973. “Georg Simmel and the Aesthetics of Social Reality.” Social
Forces 51 (March): 320-29.

Dawson, Carl A., and Warner E. Gettys. 1929. An Introduction to Sociology. New
York: Ronald.

Duncan, Hugh Dalziel. 1962. Communication and Social Order. New York: Bedminster.

Ellwood, C. 1925. The Psychology of Human Society. New York: Appleton.

Fallers, Lloyd A., ed. 1967. Immigrants and Associations. The Hague: Mouton.

Flexner, Abraham. 1940. I Remember: The Autobiography of Abraham Flexner. New
York: Simon & Schuster.
Goffman, Erving. 1959. The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. Garden City, N.Y.:
Doubleday.

Greifer, Julian. 1945. “Attitudes to the Stranger: A Study of the Attitudes of Primitive
Society and Early Hebrew Culture.” American Sociclogical Review 10 (December):
739-45.

Grusky, Oscar. 1960. “Administrative Succession in Formal Organizations.” Social
Forces 39 (December): 105-15.

Hayes, E. 1930. Sociology. New York: Appleton.

Hiller, E. T. 1933. Principles of Sociology. New York: Harper.

Homans, George. 1950. The Human Group. New York: Harcourt Brace.

Hughes, Everett C. 1949. “Social Change and Status Protest: An Essay on the Marginal
Man.” Phylon 10 (First Quarter): 58-65.

James, William. 1904. “Humanism and Truth.” Mind 13 (October): 457-75.

Kadushin, Charles. 1962. “Social Distance between Client and Professional.” American
Journal of Sociology 67 (March): 517-31.

Laumann, Edward O. 1966. Prestige and Association in an Urban Community. In-
dianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill.

Lazarsfeld, Paul F., and Robert K. Merton. 1954. “Friendship as Social Process:
A Substantive and Methodological Analysis.” Pp. 18-66 in Freedom and Control in
Modern Society, edited by Morroe Berger, Theodore Abel, and Charles H. Page.
New York: Van Nostrand.

Levine, Donald N. 1957. “Simmel and Parsons: Two Approaches to the Study of
Society.” Doctoral dissertation, University of Chicago.

. 1959. “The Structure of Simmel’s Social Thought.” Pp. 9-32 in Georg Simmel,

1858-1918, edited by Kurt H. Wolff. Columbus: Ohio State University Press.

. 1971. “Introduction.” Pp. ix-Ixv in On Individuality and Social Forms, by

Georg Simmel. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

. 1975. “Simmel at a Distance: On the History and Systematics of the Sociology
of the Stranger.” Paper presented at the annual meetings of the American Socio-
logical Association, San Francisco, August.

Lumley, F. 1928. Principles of Sociology. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Lyman, Stanford M., and Marvin B. Scott. 1970. A Sociology of the Absurd. New
York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.

McClemore, S. Dale. 1970. “Simmel’s ‘Stranger’: A Critique of the Concept.” Pacific
Scciological Review 13 (Spring): 86-94.

McFarland, David, and Daniel Brown. 1973. “Social Distance as a Metric: A Sys-
tematic Introduction to Smallest Space Analysis.” Pp, 213-53 in Bonds of Pluralism:
The Form and Substance of Urban Social Networks, by Edward O. Laumann. New
York: Wiley.

Martindale, Don. 1960. The Nature and Types of Sociological Theory. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin.

Merton, Robert K. 1968. Social Theory and Social Structure. 3d rev. ed. New York:
Free Press.

Moreno, J. L., et al. 1960. The Sociometry Reader. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press.

Nash, Dennison. 1963. “The Ethnologist as Stranger.” Southwestern Journal of An-
thropology 19 (Summer): 149-67.

Nash, Dennison, and Alvin W. Wolfe. 1957. “The Stranger in Laboratory Culture.”
American Sociological Review 22 (August): 400-405.

Nisbet, Robert A. 1959. “Comment.” American Sociological Review 24 (August):
479-81.

. 1966. The Sociological Tradition. New York: Basic.

Park, Robert E. 1924. “The Concept of Social Distance.” Journal of Applied Sociology
8 (May-June): 339-44.

. 1928. “Human Migration and the Marginal Man.” American Journal of Soci-

ology 33 (May): 881-93.

. 1950. Race and Culture: The Collected Papers of Robert Ezra Park. Vol. 1.

Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press.
Simmel’s Influence on American Sociology. I

Park, Robert E., and Ernest W. Burgess. 1921. Introduction to the Science of Soci-
ology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Parsons, Talcott, Edward Shils, Kaspar D. Naegele, and Jesse R. Pitts. 1961. Theories
of Society: Foundations of Modern Sociological Theory. Vols. 1 and 2. New York:
Free Press.

Poole, Willard. 1927. “Distance in Sociology.” American Journal of Sociology 33
(July): 99-104.

Rose, Peter I. 1967. “Strangers in Their Midst: Small-Town Jews and Their Neigh-
bors.” Pp. 463-79 in The Study of Society, edited by Peter I. Rose. New York:
Random House.

Simmel, Georg. 1908. Scziologie. Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot.

1949. “The Sociology of Sociability.” American Journal of Sociology 55

(November): 254-61.

. 1950. The Sociology of Georg Simmel. Translated by Kurt H. Wolff. Glencoe,

IIL: Free Press.

. 1955. Conflict and the Web of Group-A ffiliations. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press.

. 1959. The Sociology of Religion. Translated by Curt Rosenthal. New York:

Wisdom Library.

. 1968. The Conflict in Modern Culture and Other Essays. Translated by K.

Peter Etzkorn. New York: Teachers College Press.

. 1971. On Individuality and Social Forms. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Siu, Paul C. P. 1952. “The Sojourner.” American Journal of Sociology 58 (July):
34-44.

Small, Albion W. 1908. Letter to Walter A. Payne. Presidents’ Manuscript, Sociology
Folder, Department of Special Collections, University of Chicago Libraries.

. 1925. “[Review of] The Social Theory of Georg Simmel, by Nicholas J.

Spykman.” American Journal of Sociology 31 (July): 84-87.

. N.d. Manuscripts, Department of Special Collections, University of Chicago
Libraries.

Sorokin, Pitirim A. 1927. Social Mobility. New York: Harper.

. 1928. Contemporary Sociological Theories. New York: Harper.

Sorokin, Pitirim A., Carle C. Zimmerman, and Charles J. Galpin, eds. 1930. A
Systematic Source Book in Rural Sociology. Vol. 1. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.

Stark, Werner. 1963. The Fundamental Forms of Social Thought. New York: Fordham
University Press.

Stonequist, Everett V. 1937. The Marginal Man. New York: Scribner’s.

Vincent, Melvin. 1928. “A Study of Accommodation as a Conscious Social Process
Reflected in Employer and Employee Relationships.” Doctoral dissertation, Uni-
versity of Southern California.

von Wiese, Leopold. 1924-28. System der allgemeinen Soziologie. Munich: Dunker &
Humblot. |

von Wiese, Leopold, and Howard Becker. 1932. Systematic Sociology. New York:
Wiley.

Wallace, Walter L., ed. 1969. Sociological Theory: An Introduction. Chicago: Aldine.

Westie, Frank R. 1952. “Negro-White Status Differentials and Social Distance.”
American Sociological Review 17 (October): 550-58.

. 1953. “A Technique for the Measurement of Race Attitudes.” American
Sociological Review 18 (February): 73-78.

Wood, Margaret Mary. 1934. The Stranger: A Study in Sccial Relationships. New
York: Columbia University Press.

Zajonc, Robert B. 1952. “Aggressive Attitudes of the ‘Stranger’ as a Function of
Conformity Pressures.” Human Relations 5 (May): 205-16.
