Status and Status Strain in the Professions

Author(s): Andrew Abbott

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 86, No. 4 (Jan., 1981), pp. 819-835
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2778344

Accessed: 08-06-2016 03:37 UTC
A paradox confronts the student of relative status within professions.
Publicly venerated professional roles are often those least respected by
professionals themselves. The public admires front-line professionals like
Kildare and Welby while it distrusts the “political doctors” of the Ameri-
can Medical Association (AMA) and ignores the researchers who “don’t
care about people.” Yet these leaders and researchers enjoy status before
their colleagues that general and family practitioners do not. The publicly
admired Bailey and Belli follow the professionally disparaged specialty
of criminal defense. Intraprofessionally admired tax and securities law-
yers, in contrast, suffer a public reputation as willing agents of the
corporate aristocracy.

At first glance, this paradox seems to reflect the public’s dated images
of professional life. Professionals are admired, but for the wrong reasons.
Yet the evident public distrust of the professionally admired researchers,
specialists, and academics suggests an important divergence between the
bases of intraprofessional and public status for professionals. In this

1An earlier draft of this paper was presented at the Center for Social Organization
Studies at the University of Chicago, receiving severe but useful criticism. An ab-
breviated version of the current paper was presented at the August 1980 ASA meetings
in New York. I wish to thank Charles Cappell, Robert Gutman, Terence Halliday,
Michael Moffatt, and Michael Powell for detailed and useful comments on various
drafts. Lawrence Stone, Gerald Geison, and the fellows and members of the Davis
Center for Historical Studies at Princeton University have provided helpful comments
and insights about the historical viability of concepts discussed here.

© 1981 by The University of Chicago. 0002-9602/81/8604-0005$01.50
INTRAPROFESSIONAL STATUS

The search for these bases of status begins with the status rankings them-
selves. Detailed data on intraprofessional status—status assigned groups
within a profession by professionals themselves—are surprisingly scarce.
Laumann and Heinz (1977) report a complete ranking of legal specialties,
headed by securities, tax, and antitrust defense. Various other types of
commercial law follow, with personal injury, civil rights, and criminal
prosecution below them. Debtor, landlord-tenant, and divorce fall at the
bottom of the scale. In medicine, Merton, Bloom, and Rogoff (1956),
Becker et al. (1961), Schartzbaum, McGrath, and Rothman (1973), and
Shortell (1974) have reported roughly similar hierarchies headed by spe-
cialty surgery, followed by general surgery and the various divisions of
internal medicine. General practice, allergy, dermatology, and psychiatry
bring up the rear. Several studies (Coker et al. 1966) have shown public
health to be of low status. The general preeminence of specialists over
generalists and of surgeons over all is well known. Within psychiatry, a
clear hierarchy runs from psychoanalysts through outpatient psychiatrists
to the foreign medical graduates at the state hospitals (Henry, Sims, and
Spray 1973). In social work, psychiatric social work proved its status
over general casework in the twenties (Lubove 1969). England presents
the hierarchy of barristers over solicitors and a (current) pattern among
medical specialists rather similar to that in America (Abel-Smith and
Stevens 1967; Stevens 1966). Many underlying dimensions have been
suggested to account for these intraprofessional hierarchies. The most im-
portant are income, power, client status, and substantive difficulty (non-
routineness) .

Income bases its claim on the general empirical correlation of income
with intraprofessional prestige. Most data on specialty incomes seem to
follow prestige lines at least in outline (see, e.g., Stevens 1966; Carlin
1962). It is therefore surprising that Laumann and Heinz (1977) found
no significant correlation between the two among their lawyers. In fact,
income fails in a number of particular cases. English barristers have often
earned no more than solicitors, yet nearly always enjoy higher status
(Abel-Smith and Stevens 1967). Employed professionals in general have
lower status than free-lance and associated professionals with comparable
incomes. Within a given profession, academic professionals receive salaries
notoriously incommensurate with their high status. Also, interacting pro-
fessionals often establish status relations without knowing each others’
incomes. Income must be inferred from other qualities, such as specialty,
which may convey status independently.

As an alternative basis of intraprofessional status, power has a similar
aggregate success rate undercut by numerous detailed failures. The alli-
ances of professional status and power that wrought the Flexner and Reed
reports are well known (Berlant 1975; Auerbach 1976). Yet while the
urban district attorney lacks a judge’s status, for example, his effective
power is often considerably greater. Administrative physicians similarly
increase their power while losing status. Domination of professional asso-
ciations is only loosely associated with status. The American Bar Associa-
tion (ABA) may be a positive example of such a relation, while the AMA
seems a mixed case (Garceau 1961) and the American Psychiatric Asso-
ciation, at certain points in its history, a possible counterexample (Abbott
1980). Even within professional work groups, positions of power—man-
aging partnerships, department chairs—are hardly regarded as status con-
ferring, but as the reverse.®
Another commonly suggested basis for intraprofessional status has been
status of client. Thus, 57% of American psychoanalytic patients are pro-
fessionals (Marmor 1975). Similarly, in 19th-century British medicine,
physicians, surgeons, apothecaries, and chemists treated patients standing
in status ranks parallel to their own (Reader 1966). Laumann and Heinz
(1977) make such an argument for American lawyers today. Yet the client
status argument fails with employed professionals. Governments, corpora-
tions, and armed forces are all corporate agents of great income and power,
if not always of high status. Yet the professionals they employ are normal-
ly depreciated by free-lance professionals on the same technical level (see,
e.g., Ben-David 1958; Harries-Jenkins 1970). Also, status-mobile profes-
sional groups do not necessarily seek high status clients. British apothecar-
ies and surgeons emphasized their control of practice in the 19th century,
not their ability to treat gentlemen (Reader 1966; Stevens 1966).

A related argument holds that, since high status clients can usually
commit more resources to professional problem solving, they create prob-
lems of greater intrinsic professional interest. Money buys complexity and
confers its status upon that complexity. Based on such examples as anti-
trust law, this argument can be extended into such fields as accounting,
architecture, and possibly psychiatry. Although it seems silly when applied
to the routine areas of medicine, it does well with esoteric medicine, where
excess utilization by high status clients is well known (Mechanic 1968).
Again, however, this argument fails in crucial cases. While manufacturing
organizations and cities are corporations of roughly equivalent power and
magnitude, the former command the highest status legal services available,
while the latter can attract such services only for bond issues or other
matters of corporate law. Similarly, while such private mental hospitals
as McLean and Bloomingdale served extremely high status clienteles from
the 1850s onward, they eventually lost their elite physicians to govern-
ment-based research hospitals of higher intraprofessional status—the Bos-
ton and New York Psychopathic Hospitals—although the latter organiza-
tions worked nearly exclusively with charity and welfare cases (Abbott
1980).

The issue of complexity suggests an alternative basis for intraprofes-
sional status, one asserted by functional theorists of the professions. Here,
intraprofessional status is attributed to nonroutine work. (See Becker et al.
[1961] for an observational study of such a basis of status.) General
practitioners refer difficult (i.e., nonroutine) cases to specialists, who han-
dle them or pass them on in turn. Indeed, it is true that exceedingly rou-
tine aspects of professional practice are often ultimately degraded to the
paraprofessional level (Freidson 1970). Yet the issue of routine is com-
plicated. Although the low status solo lawyer does mostly routine legal
work in probate, real estate, divorce, and personal injury, in fact he spends
much of his time cultivating the referral network that brings him cases
(Carlin 1962). While the legal aspects of his work are routine, his daily
tasks include other aspects that are not. Similarly, mental hospital psy-
chiatry is hardly routine work, although university psychiatrists hardly
consider most of that work psychiatry at all. In such low status contexts,
professional routine is a defense against nonprofessional intrusions (Bel-
knap 1956). Insofar as a real level of routine work exists in professions,
its status is well above that of such pariah specialties as mental hospital
psychiatry, “ambulance chasing” law, and “street preaching” clergy.*

These hypothesized bases for intraprofessional status have much in
common. They share a strong general correlation with intraprofessional
status, and most assume that intraprofessional status ultimately reflects
the same material variables as does general social status. They also share
a generic weakness: the strong general correlations break down on detailed
inspection. There are two strategies for dealing with this breakdown. The
first would combine all these bases with a theory determining the condi-
tions of their precedence in status conferral.5 I shall take the second
course of suggesting an underlying variable.

Intraprofessional status is in reality a function of professional purity.
By professional purity I mean the ability to exclude nonprofessional issues
or irrelevant professional issues from practice. Within a given profession,
the highest status professionals are those who deal with issues predigested
and predefined by a number of colleagues. These colleagues have removed
human complexity and difficulty to leave a problem at least professionally
defined, although possibly still very difficult to solve. Conversely, the lowest
status professionals are those who deal with problems from which the
human complexities are not or cannot be removed.

The theoretical origins of this argument lie in anthropology. As Douglas
(1970) argues, purity and contagion taboos are an extension of cultural
systems. The impure is that which violates the categories and classifications
of a given cultural system. Through amorphousness or ambiguity it brings
together things that the cultural system wishes to separate. Nearly all
writers agree that the application of esoteric knowledge to particular cases
is characteristic of professions. Since this knowledge is a cultural system,
it must, by Douglas’s argument, define certain problems as taboo because
of their threat to its principles and classifications. Thus, problems that
fundamentally challenge basic professional categories are impure and pro-
fessionally defiling. It is at once clear why Laumann and Heinz (1977)
find that legal practice involving corporations in nearly all cases stands
above that involving private individuals. The corporation is the lawyers’
creation. The muck of feelings and will is omitted from it ab initio. Where
feelings are highest and clients most legally irrational—in divorce—intra-
professional status is lowest.

Over time, professional knowledge develops a system of such relative
judgments of purity and impurity. All these judgments follow the same
pattern. The professionally defined or definable is more pure than the
undefined or undefinable. The clear is more pure than the amorphous, the
definite more pure than the ambiguous. As Dumont (1972) has shown,
the accretion of such judgments produces a social structure in which these
judgments are loosely associated with positions in a division of labor (in
this case, a division of professional labor). The resultant hierarchy is, in
fact, the status hierarchy that we observe within the professions.

Defining status in terms of professional purity, of exclusion of the pro-
fessionally irrelevant, immediately explains the counterexamples to the
other bases of status. The barrister stands above the solicitor because he
works in a purely legal context with purely legal concepts; the solicitor
links the law to immediate human concerns. The free-lance or associated
professional stands above the employed professional because his work is
not conditioned by employer policy. The academic professional’s high
status reflects his exclusively intraprofessional work. Unlike income, purity
of practice is easily ascertained in a short conversation as well as easily
inferred from such characteristics as specialty. It is a ready currency for
status.

In the case of power, the counterexamples can be explained in the same
way. The judge stands above the district attorney because he may keep
his professional purity through the rituals of the courtroom. The public
defender and the district attorney must purify issues for his consideration.
When the judge directly enters the process of case disposition and thereby
forgoes his ritual protection, he gains power but loses status (Skolnick
1967; Blumberg 1967). The administrative physician and the AMA offi-
cial lose status because their professional practice is tainted by organiza-
tional and corporate ends. The managing partner and department chair,
despite their positions within purely professional organizations, suffer im-
purity in the same way (Smigel 1964).

The counterexamples to the other theories can also be accounted for.
The upward thrust of British surgeons and apothecaries was founded upon
two claims of purity beyond that of the physicians, the first, purity of
knowledge (rationality), the second, purity of practice (ethicality). Since
higher status clients conferred no additional professional purity, they were
unnecessary. Similarly, the great exception to the routine theory—the
low status of nonroutine, front-line professional work—is explained by
the extreme professional impurity of that work. Even though gener-
alist practice may be more routine, it is less likely to be tainted by
nonprofessional issues. The professional who enters the emergency room,
the criminal court, the receiving ward, the client’s home, is professionally
defiled. Such defilement may follow from issues that professionals of other
kinds might handle. But the act of extricating one’s own particular set of
problems is professionally defiling, precisely because the interwoven com-
plexity of social life always threatens any specific set of professional judg-
ments. Such defilement explains the inability of cities to command high
status legal resources for anything other than corporate work. While such
matters as bond issues involve only the professionally pure world of cor-
porate law, in most of a city’s other legal business—criminal prosecution,
condemnation, eviction—the squalid realities of poverty, racism, and crime
play out their drama in real human lives, mocking the pristine abstraction
of the law. For the professional, the invention of tax loopholes within the
exclusively legal world of corporate law is a much cleaner business.®
Professional practice proceeds by applying abstract knowledge to a par-
ticular situation. The situation is first defined as a case, rendered into pro-
fessional terms. Inferences about the professionally defined case are then
made within the professional knowledge system itself. From these infer-
ences come directives which are translated into prescriptions or answers in
the client’s own world. So far the discussion of impurities has focused on
impurity in the first and last of these three processes, the processes of
diagnosis and treatment. Thus, the depressed, unemployed welfare mother
with 10 dependents and no skills has a problem too amorphous for the
psychiatric system to diagnose or treat. In contrast, the so-called crimi-
nally insane present a problem whose professional diagnosis is not amor-
phous but rather ambiguous. A crucial variable in both diagnostic and
therapeutic impurity is the degree to which the client translates for him-
self. Much of the correlation between the statuses of client and profes-
sional comes about because higher status clients are more likely to trans-
late their problems into professional terms themselves (Lochner 1975) and
are equally adept at translating professional prescriptions into their own
world of action.

These diagnostic and therapeutic impurities may be roughly measured.
The number of different professions claiming jurisdiction over a problem
measures its ambiguity. The number of interprofessional contacts in re-
ferral measures its amorphousness. Predefinition can be measured directly
in clients’ presentations of their problems (Mechanic 1968; Freidson
1970). But not all impurities occur within diagnosis and treatment—there
are problems in professional inference as well.

Some of these are caused by the use of residual terms in diagnosis. Thus,
the history of dementia, dementia praecox, and schizophrenia is the history
of a residual term from which other psychoses—paresis, pellagra psycho-
sis, etc.—have gradually been removed. Since dementia was largely a re-
sidual term, few effective inferences could be made from it. It was amor-
phousness successfully defined. Ultimately, it proved so intraprofessionally
recalcitrant that high status physicians ceased dealing with it altogether.

Other professional impurities are more complex. Some well-defined pro-
fessional problems prove insoluble at the first level of professional infer-
ence and require consultation with individuals at a second level. The higher
status of these consultants does not lie in their specialization, for not all
of them are specialists in the common medical pattern of referral from
general practitioner to internist to cardiologist to mitral valve surgeon.
The barrister, the immunologist, the psychoanalyst, the senior architect
are not more subject specialized than are those professionals beneath them
in referral chains. What they share (with the mitral valve surgeon) is an
ability to work chiefly with problems from which not only general impuri-
ties but also a number of professional side issues have been ruled out. The
process of referral or consultation is thus one of successive, iterative purifi-
cation. The cardiologist does not worry about liver problems; the internist
has defined the patient into specialized terms for him. Such successive
purification is, in fact, the norm of professional life. The intern prepares
the body, the resident opens it, the cardiac surgeon works with the heart
alone. Clearly, such refinement can be measured by patterns of referral,
lengths of referral chains, and the like. Such studies are surprisingly scarce
(but see Stevens 1966; Shortell 1972).

To the problems that successfully traverse the entire status hierarchy of
purifications a profession has two responses. They may be degraded to
some residual status—as functional neuroses were in medicine in the early
20th century—and referred to an outcast, low status specialty—in that
case, to psychiatry. Or they may be given special status as anomalies and
made the focus of high status, academic (purely intraprofessional) work
in the profession. Anomalies are problems whose unresolvability symbol-
izes the fundamental ambiguities of internal professional inference. Since
their resolution is anticipated by reduction or simplification to some
“deeper level,” they symbolize for the profession the possibility of yet
further purification, the possibility of stilling the dangerous conflict of
present alternatives. Therein lies their charisma. As Douglas argues, “We
recognize that [disorder] is destructive to existing patterns; also it has
potentiality. It symbolizes both power and danger” (1970, p. 114).

Professional purity, then, is indeed the basis of intraprofessional status.
It accounts for both the successes of the other bases and their failures. It
is based directly on the cultural structure of professional work. It is a
readily available, common currency for status. Its only problem as an
account of professional status is that the public seems to ignore it com-
pletely.
tions of patients, medical students, physicians, and the public show general
practitioners considerably higher on the lay scale (Shortell 1974). These
differences again suggest that the basis of a profession’s general status in
society is not purity at all.

The high public status of the professions is unquestioned in nearly all
data on occupational prestige (Inkeles and Rossi 1956; Hodge, Siegel, and
Rossi 1966; Hodge, Treiman, and Rossi 1966). The literature analyzing
the bases or dimensions of this public status is extensive (see, e.g., Gus-
field and Schwarz 1963; Laumann 1966; Marsh 1971). The common the-
ories are that general social status is based on power, income, and/or edu-
cation. Of these, power is probably the least relevant to the high status of
the professions. While doctors and lawyers may be publicly perceived as
powerful, such power can hardly be attributed to scientists, college profes-
sors, dentists, and ministers—all professions high on standard occupational
prestige scales.

Income is a more likely candidate. Professionals in general have large
incomes. Ceteris paribus, income does command status in American society.
Yet income again fails in detail. The public status ordering of the profes-
sions does not reproduce that of income (see, e.g., Friedman and Kuznets
1939). More important, clergy and teachers enjoy status above that of
farm owners, factory owners, and numerous other occupational groups that
usually stand above them in income. Small town professionals, in particu-
lar, often enjoy higher status than their incomes imply (Vidich and Bens-
man 1960). Certainly the subspecialties relatively more admired by the
public—general medical practice and courtroom law—are not admired for
their higher income (Bruhn and Parsons 1964, 1965). Indeed the whole
public image of the professions has generally deemphasized income alto-
gether (Parsons 1964). Income’s problems as a basis for the general social
status of the professions suggest that professions have somehow used status
to achieve income rather than the reverse. This would explain the rough
but inexact correlation of the two.

Education is the most serious possibility. All upwardly mobile profes-
sional groups have emphasized education as a means of collective mobility
(Larson 1977; Bledstein 1976). The overall correlation of education with
social status is undeniable. Certainly the importance of knowledge in the
professions requires that education be closely associated with all aspects of
professional life. Yet again there are nagging difficulties. On the one hand,
the public often admires relatively uneducated professionals and heterodox
professionals. The debates over Laetrile and Krebiozen illustrate the public
antipathy to overeducated professional elites, as does the “Velikovsky
affair” in another context. Moreover, American clergy, despite widely
varying educational requirements across denominations, have always com-
manded rather high status. On the other hand, professionally educated in-
dividuals who are not active professionals do not necessarily continue to
enjoy high status, as many married female professionals have found on
withdrawing semipermanently from the labor force (Epstein 1970). Fur-
thermore, given that television presents the professionals America wants
to see and teaches American children about professional status, it seems
surprising, if education is the basis of professional status, that professional
education is almost totally neglected on television (Gitlin 1977; DeFleur
1964; DeFleur and DeFleur 1967). Its only relevance is as a source of
professional efficacy. These various difficulties together imply that, if edu-
cation confers status on professionals, it does so only in action.

Shils (1965) has argued that professionals enjoy high status because of
the order-giving power that proceeds from their application of esoteric
knowledge. While this power over disorder is most obvious in medicine,
psychiatry, law, and the clergy, in fact all the professions attempt to tame
disorder or to create new order. This ordering has two major properties.
First, its outcome is not guaranteed. Second, it is accomplished by means
of esoteric knowledge, usually acquired by extensive training. The profes-
sional, then, confronts disorder or nonorder with a system that enables him,
most of the time, to control or order it. Even if he does not necessarily
succeed, at least he makes effective contact with disorder via his knowl-
edge.

It is this effective contact with the disorderly that is the basis of pro-
fessional status in society. I have already discussed the charisma of dis-
order itself. The impure or polluting holds the possibility of change, of
renewal, of reconciliation. As many deviance theorists have argued, the
impure symbolizes the principles of social and cultural structure (Erikson
1966). While these properties make the various disorders and nonorders
confronted by professionals charismatic, they are nonetheless still impure.
To see a crime, to converse with an insane person, to nurse a sick relative
—these are defiling acts for an everyday conscience, mind, or body. Only
if he can control them can their charisma be transferred to one who under-
takes them. In our society, as in any other, those who possess the cultural
apparatus sufficient to touch and possibly control these social impurities
assume their charismatic status. With his deep knowledge of cultural cate-
gories, indeed his partial membership in the group that creates them, the
professional possesses that apparatus. He touches the problems and diffi-
culties of our world without personal defilement. His reward is to assume
their status. The risk of failure heightens the charisma of the disorder he
confronts and hence heightens the status he draws from the confrontation,
as Fox’s work shows (Fox and Swazey 1974).

It is thus clear why contact seems as necessary to general professional
status in society as does education. The academic professional does not
contact real disorder, but only the disorder of the profession’s own cate-
gories. His colleagues grant him status, therefore, but the larger public does
not. The public’s professional, as Gitlin (1977) shows, is an authoritative,
effective idealist whose warm character and timeless knowledge stand be-
tween the passive viewer and active social disorder (see also Shortell
[1974] on passivity). Only active contact enables the professional to take
on the full charisma of disorder itself. Education that is not used thus
cannot confer equivalent status. Conversely, effective contact itself can
confer status in the absence of elaborate education or allegiance to accept-
ed categories, as the history of charlatans and religious reformers shows.
Viewing effective contact with charismatic disorder as crucial likewise ac-
counts for the failures of income as a basis of the generally high social
status of the professions. In contact with the postsputnik unknown, scien-
tists stand above lawyers in status if not in income. The admired special-
ties are not referral specialties with their high incomes, but front-line,
lower income specialties in immediate contact with disorder. Even the
poorest country doctor can look death in the eye.”
integration emerges. This problem is addressed by a number of strategies.
One is to force all careers to start in the charismatic heartland. Thus arise
the anachronistic rituals of moot court, cadaver dissection, and missionary
internships. Corporate strategies for reunification include the hegemony
of general over specialty associations (American law has steadfastly re-
fused to acknowledge the latter) and the creation of heartland renewals for
the elite, such as community mental health and legal aid. Strategies for
maintaining unity in knowledge and skills include continuing education,
codification, recertification, and elite “reform” of lower status practice in
the heartland. All of these seek to redress the increasing disunity caused
by professional regression.

The consequences of professional regression reach beyond the profession
itself to the interprofessional world. As regression occurs, new professions
and old rivals are waiting to take over the charismatic dirty work and earn
its status. The interprofessional consequence of regression is conflict and
competition. (For a brief case study, see Pettigrew [1973].) Jurisdiction
over the heartland is maintained in several ways. Despite their low status,
front-line professionals are seldom totally excluded. Interns and other
trainees also serve as locum tenentes. At the corporate level, joint commit-
tees are founded to settle boundary disputes. Thus, the criminal responsi-
bility of the insane, despite the minimal status of psychiatric practice with
the insane and of legal practice of criminal defense, commands extensive
cooperative elite attention from both professions lest important dimensions
of jurisdiction be lost. In reality, at the front line, such issues are handled
by extremely dirty (in professional terms) collaboration and working con-
sensus among psychiatrists, judges, district attorneys, and mental health
officials.

In the area of skills, competition couples with the need for intraprofes-
sional unity to produce a characteristically defensive systematization de-
signed to sharpen professional boundaries. Thus lawyers wish to abolish
the incompetency plea on grounds of systematization (Burt and Morris
1972), while psychiatric researchers are seeking the true nature of respon-
sibility in the brain. Each profession rationalizes to defend its jurisdiction
over the “criminally insane.” This defensive systematization and the con-
sequent sharpening of professional boundaries lessens the ability of the
professions as a group to deal with problems not amenable to the highly
rationalized mappings of the professional world. Thus, death, surely a
charismatically disorderly event, involves clerical, medical, legal, and pos-
sibly psychiatric professionals; yet as a general problem it is largely in the
hands of funeral directors, outcast pseudoprofessionals (Habenstein 1954).
The conflict engendered by professional regression has the functional con-
sequence of making the professions better at what they do do and worse
at what they do not.
In addition to these intra- and interprofessional effects, professional re-
gression has consequences in the general social context as well. There the
great problem created for the profession is the maintenance of public pres-
tige despite withdrawal from its real basis. Individual careers can partly
accomplish this—hence the highly visible location of medical training in
the emergency room. High status professionals often serve on the boards
(and usually only the boards) of charity and other organizations dealing
with their heartland disorders. Another career strategy, part-time work in
legal aid, has maintained charismatic, public visibility for lawyers. More
important than career visibility, however, is a systematic campaign of pub-
lic relations aimed at persuading the public of the active contact of pro-
fession and professionals with publicly charismatic disorder. The AMA
founded its Physicians Advisory Committee to Television, Radio, and
Motion Pictures in 1955, and its successes are evident. The relative public
invisibility of intraprofessionally high status, regressed professionals is also
noteworthy.

In the general social context, regressing professions face a difficult choice
about knowledge and skills. The threats of internal disunity and interpro-
fessional competition lead to defensive systematization, but this may make
professional paradigms visibly removed from common sense. The Miranda
decision preserved legal hegemony over police discretion, but proved pub-
licly costly. Medical paradigms decreed that Laetrile need not be tested,
but public outcry has forced a test. Such dangerous external challenges
must be either silenced or ingested. But even ingestion, along with im-
pression management and career linkages, often does not suffice to main-
tain proper levels of professional charisma in the context of professional
regression.

Professions may therefore also follow a final strategy, that of slowly dis-
persing professional charisma to the public. Both by accident and by de-
sign, the “profession shows” on television have helped in this. More im-
portant are the professionals whose public pronouncements interpret the
profession’s function and its vision of order to the public. These are the
public speakers, the testifiers, the professionals quoted in the media. Im-
portant also are the popularizers, whose books dole out professional knowl-
edge and thereby some of the charisma implicit in the effective contact
with disorder enabled by that knowledge. Yet ultimately this dispersal of
charisma puts the public in the professional fellowship, in the company of
the order-givers (Shils 1961). Thus, the slow dispersal of Freudian psy-
chiatry to the American public has ultimately resulted in widespread
threats to psychoanalytic supremacy in the area of emotional problems.®
8 These threats are being met with professional countermoves. One may interpret the

concept of narcissism, first promulgated in its current form in Kohut’s opaque mono-
graph (1971), as an attempt at the decisive obfuscation necessary to recoup profes-
There are thus numerous developments in the American professions that
can be viewed as consequences of the conflict between internal and exter-
nal status rankings. Such a status conflict argument can also be general-
ized more effectively than traditional approaches to status within profes-
sions. For example, the different dynamics of purity among German law-
yers lead to a higher intraprofessional ranking for generalists, although the
income hierarchy among specialties resembles that in America (Ruesche-
meyer 1973). A more interesting case is that of Brahmans in traditional
Indian society, who can be shown to have undergone similar processes of
regression. Temple and family Brahmans suffer a loss of status for per-
forming precisely those priestly functions on which their premier place in
the social hierarchy rests. The highest status is reserved for “the learned
Brahmans who do not serve at all” (Dumont 1972, p. 109; see also Man-
delbaum 1972, p. 188). The comparison of status bases proves essential in
understanding professional dynamics in earlier Western societies as well.
Precisely because the public status of 18th-century English professionals
rested on an ancient purity hierarchy (that of sciences, liberal arts, me-
chanical arts, and labor, a hierarchy more fully expressed in France), there
was little conflict-induced change in that period. The public and intrapro-
fessional hierarchies were similarly based. It is the general shift from a
public status based on gentlemanliness to the more rationalized status
based on effective contact that begets the status dynamics discussed here.
Of course, status dynamics are but one of many processes in professional
change. But independent appraisal of them seems essential to the history
and sociology of the professions.
Bruhn, J. G., and O. A. Parsons. 1964. “Medical Students’ Attitudes toward Four
Medical Specialties.” Journal of Medical Education 39:40-49.

. 1965. “Attitudes toward Medical Specialties.” Journal of Medical Education
40:273-80.

Burt, R. A., and N. Morris. 1972. “A Proposal for the Abolition of the Incompetency
Plea.” University of Chicago Law Review 40:66-95.

Carlin, J. 1962. Lawyers on Their Own. New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University
Press.

Coker, R. E., J. Kosa, B. G. Greenberg, K. W. Back, T. G. Donnelly, N. Miller, and
F. S. McConnell. 1966. “Medical Careers in Public Health.” Milbank Memorial Fund
Quarterly 44, no. 2, pt. 1: 143-258.

DeFleur, M. L. 1964. “Occupational Roles as Portrayed on Television.” Public Opinion
Quarterly 28:57-74.

DeFleur, M. L., and L. B. DeFleur. 1967. “The Relative Contribution of Television
as a Learning Source for Children’s Occupational Knowledge.” American Sociological
Review 32:777-89.

Douglas, M. 1970. Purity and Danger. London: Penguin.

Dumont, L. 1972. Homo Hierarchicus. Translated by M. Sainsbury. London: Paladin.

Epstein, C. F. 1970. Woman’s Place. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of Cali-
fornia Press.

Erikson, K. T. 1966. Wayward Puritans. New York: Wiley.

Fox, R. C., and J. P. Swazey. 1974. The Courage to Fail. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Freidson, E. 1970. Profession of Medicine. New York: Dodd, Mead.

Friedman, M., and S. Kuznets. 1939. Income from Independent Professional Practice.
New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Garceau, O. 1961. The Political Life of the American Medical Association. Hamden,
Conn.: Archon.

Gitlin, T. 1977. “The Televised Professional.” Social Policy 8(3):94-99.

Gusfield, J. R., and M. Schwartz. 1963. “The Meanings of Occupational Prestige.”
American Sociological Review 28:265-71.

Habenstein, R. W. 1954. “The American Funeral Director.” Ph.D. dissertation, Uni-
versity of Chicago.

Harries-Jenkins, G. 1970. “Professionals in Organizations.” Pp. 51-107 in Professions
and Professionalization, edited by J. A. Jackson. London: Cambridge University
Press.

Henry, W. E., J. H. Sims, and S. L. Spray. 1973. The Public and Private Lives of
Psychotherapists. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Hodge, R. W., P. M. Siegel, and P. H. Rossi. 1966. “Occupational Prestige in the
United States, 1925-1963.” Pp. 322-34 in Class, Status, and Power, edited by R.
Bendix and S. M. Lipset. New York: Free Press.

Hodge, R. W., D. J. Treiman, and P. H. Rossi. 1966. “A Comparative Study of Oc-
cupational Prestige.” Pp. 309-21 in Class, Status, and Power, edited by R. Bendix
and S. M. Lipset. New York: Free Press.

Inkeles, A., and P. H. Rossi. 1956. “National Comparisons of Occupational Prestige.”
American Journal of Sociology 61:329-39.

Kohut, H. J. 1971. The Analysis of the Self. New York: International Universities
Press.

Larson, M. S. 1977. The Rise of Professionalism. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University
of California Press.

Laumann, E. O. 1966. Prestige and Association in an Urban Community. Indianapolis:
Bobbs-Merrill.

Laumann, E. O., and J. B. Heinz. 1977. “Specialization and Prestige in the Legal Pro-
fession.” American Bar Foundation Research Journal 1977:155-216.

Lochner, P. R. 1975. “The No-Fee and Low Fee Legal Practice of Private Attorneys.”
Law and Society Review 9:431-73.

Lubove, R. 1969. The Professional Altruist. New York: Atheneum.
Mandelbaum, D. G. 1972. Society in India. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of
California Press.

Marmor, J. 1975. Psychiatrists and Their Patients. Washington: Joint Information
Service.

Marsh, R. M. 1971. “The Explanation of Occupational Prestige Hierarchies.” Social
Forces 50:214~22.

Mechanic, D. 1968. Medical Sociology. New York: Free Press.

Merton, R. K., S. Bloom, and N. Rogoff. 1956. “Columbia/Pennsylvania Studies in
the Sociology of Medical Education.” Journal of Medical Education 31:552-65.

Millerson, G. 1964. The Qualifying Associations. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

Parsons, T. 1964. “The Professions and Social Structure.” Pp. 34-49 in Essays in So-
ciological Theory. New York: Free Press.

Pettigrew, A. 1973. “Occupational Specialization as an Emergent Process.” Sociological
Review, ns. 21:255-78.

Reader, W. J. 1966. Professional Men. New York: Basic.

Rueschemeyer, D. 1973. Lawyers and Their Society. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.

Schartzbaum, A., J. McGrath, and R. Rothman. 1973. “The Perception of Prestige
Differences among Medical Subspecialties.” Social Science and Medicine 7:365-71.
Shils, E. A. 1961. “Centre and Periphery.” Pp. 117-30 in The Logic of Personal Knowl-

edge. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
. 1965. “Charisma, Order and Status.” American Sociological Review 30:199-

 

213.

Shortell, S. M. 1972. A Model of Physician Referral Behavior. Research monograph
31. Chicago: Center for Health Administration Studies.

. 1974. “Occupational Prestige Differences within the Medical and Allied Health
Professions.” Social Science and Medicine 8:1-9.

Skolnick, J. H. 1967. Justice without Trial. New York: Science Editions.

Smigel, E. O. 1964. The Wall Street Lawyer. New York: Free Press.

Stevens, R. 1966. Medical Practice in Modern England. New Haven, Conn.: Yale Uni-
versity Press.

Vidich, A. J., and J. Bensman. 1960. Small Town in Mass Society. New York: Anchor.
