American Character and the American Novel: An Expansion of Reflection Theory in the
Sociology of Literature

Author(s): Wendy Griswold

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 86, No. 4 (Jan., 1981), pp. 740-765
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2778341

Accessed: 08-06-2016 03:32 UTC
The nature and consequence of the connections between a society and its
literature are the province of literary sociology. One approach to these
connections, reflection theory, simply states that cultural products such as
literature in some way mirror the social order (Peterson 1979; Albrecht
1954). Hardly a surprising idea, yet much energy has been expended in
maintaining this premise that literature is not a discrete entity, sui generis,
but has links with the social world. It is my contention that this battle
has been won, and that sociologists of literature should now redress some
of the imbalances that occurred while the field was coming of age. Two
such imbalances require particular attention. Some scholars have been so
adept at exploring the influence of cultural markets or literary elites that
they have paid relatively little attention to the actual content of the
literary or cultural works (Escarpit 1971; White and White 1965; Clark
1977, 1979; Hirsch 1972). Others have taken content extremely seriously
but have wanted to attribute it to a single cause in the social world, be
it characteristics of literary elites, structures of class consciousness, or
changes in popular ideology (Lowenthal 1961; Goldman 1967; Williams
1966; Wright 1975). These imbalances have produced excellent iconoclastic
studies necessary to counter the emphasis on the text and nothing but the
text that used to prevail in traditional literary analysis. Now the time has
come for sociologists to consolidate their gains by doing literary research
that both takes content into account and considers a variety of causal
influences from the social world. The following study was undertaken in
the spirit of this enterprise.

Is the American novel unique, as it is often said to be? If so, do its
peculiar properties reflect some American character or experience? I have
examined the relationship between American novels and the society that
produced them by analyzing a random sample of 130 novels published in
the United States between 1876 and 1910. The analysis shows that seem-
ingly mundane things such as copyright laws have had considerable influ-
ence on the content of American novels. My findings demonstrate that the
concept of literature as reflection must be expanded to include reflection
of production circumstances, author characteristics, and formal problems,
as well as the preoccupations of any particular society.

To begin, consider the background of the production and consumption
of novels in the late 19th century. Americans during this period were
highly literate and interested in reading (Cipolla 1969, table 21). Follow-
ing the Civil War there had been an unprecedented growth of the reading
habit in the United States (Tebbel 1975).2 The literacy rate and the
demand for books had always been high in the new nation, but early
19th-century books were too expensive for widespread purchase. Tech-
nological advances made by the middle of the century—including the steam-
driven cylinder press, the use of stereotyped plates, and cheaper techniques
of paper manufacture and book binding—made the mass production of
books possible for the first time (Steinberg [1974] 1977). Within 10 years
of Appomattox, books, magazines, and newspapers were proliferating, and
the publishing industry was expanding rapidly, with some 200 houses op-
erating by the early 1880s.

Fiction led in sheer quantity of titles published. The fiction flood began
in the 1870s and continued until 1908, the first year when novels did not
lead all other categories of books published. For the year 1886, Publishers
Weekly (January 27, 1887, p. 185) broke down the 4,676 titles published
by categories; the top 10 were fiction, 1,080; law, 469; juveniles, 458;
literary history and miscellaneous, 388; theology, 377; education and lan-
guage, 275; poetry and drama, 220; history, 182; medical science, 177;
and social and political science, 174.5

The typical reader was a young woman. Women have always been slightly
in the majority as consumers of fiction, and it appears that the reading
habit in general decreases with age. This average reader was more likely
to come from the city than from a small town or rural area and more apt
to be located in the Northeast than in the South or Midwest.

New York had long dominated the publishing industry, followed by Bos-
ton, Philadelphia, and Chicago.5 Mass production necessitated mass retail-
ing. Much to the disgust of traditional bookstore owners, who felt that the
commercialization of literature was a fine thing but only up to a certain
point, John Wanamaker had opened the door to department stores and
dry-goods dealers stocking books along with their other merchandise. And
such mass marketing of books was associated with a surge of advertising
and display techniques, disdained by publishers before the Civil War. Some
decorum was to be preserved, however; in the 1880s, a copywriter who
described Leaves of Grass as “a daisy—and don’t you forget it!” was
promptly fired (Tebbel 1975, p. 154).

In view of the vast number of novels being written and read in late
19th-century America, it seems reasonable to examine these novels to see
if they reveal anything about the society that produced them. The first
question that must be asked is whether there was anything peculiarly
American about the American novel.
I

The rise of the novel has been well charted, particularly by Ian Watt
([1957] 1974). Watt shows that the 18th-century novel in England was
the product of an age in which the human personality was believed to be
essentially knowable, knowledge of it coming from the accumulation of
evidence drawn from the detailed observation of behavior. This interest
coincided with two other 18th-century developments. One was the rapid
expansion of a new audience for literature, the literate middle class, espe-
cially the leisured middle-class women. Lacking the education and inclina-
tion to read Latin or serious verse, yet wanting diversion, these women
offered a ready market for a not-too-demanding literary form. The second
development was the decline of patronage and the appearance of its eco-
nomic equivalent for writers, the bookseller, who encompassed the activities
of publisher and printer as well as merchant. The booksellers knew that
their customers wanted hours of entertainment, not moments of exquisite
feeling. Therefore, they paid authors by the page. For the author, in con-
sequence, “Speed and copiousness tended to become the supreme economic
virtues” (Watt [1957] 1974, p. 56).

This confluence of interest in the human personality, audience, and
economic institutions gave rise to a genre that was easy to read, long,
written in prose, fictitious, devoted to subjects of interest to middle-class
women and to an analysis of character through detailed description of
behavior—the genre we know as the novel. Eighteenth-century novelists
explored the subjects of particular interest to their readership: love and
marriage, economic individualism, the complexities of modern life, the possi-
bility of personal morality in a corrupting world.

It has often been held that although “the novel” looks like what I have
just described, “the American novel” does not. One version of this argu-
ment is that classic American fiction is about men removing themselves
from society, especially from women who seem to represent the constraints
of social and domestic life. Often with a dark-skinned male companion,
these men, or boys, flee to the ocean, the forest, the unknown lands down
river and there test their individual strength (Marx 1964). Leslie Fiedler
(1966), basing his case on classic works which fit the man-fleeing-society
pattern, has asked,
Fiedler attributes this theme of flight from society to an American pa-
thology, a social and sexual immaturity, tinged with racial guilt, that
manifests itself in the American novelist’s inability to write about adult
subjects such as heterosexual love and the reconciliation of individual
freedom with social life.

D. H. Lawrence ([{1923] 1977) similarly maintained that American
authors were unable to face the facts of life. They perpetuated the Ameri-
can lie, writing of democracy and conventional morality, while beneath
the benign surface of their art lurked the unacknowledged recognition
that democracy is a failure, inequality is inevitable, and the passions are
ultimately victorious over rationality. Lawrence believed the American
promise lay in the sloughing off of the dead skin of European ideas, such
as democracy and equality, leading toward the eventual freedom of heroic
souls to follow their inner promptings, without the overlay of conven-
tional ideas. And he saw the first signs of the fulfillment of this American
promise in the American novels. Artists lie, but their art tells the truth.

Recently, Ann Douglas (1978) has found a different type of dishonesty
in the American novels of the 19th century, that of sentimentalism. Sen-
timentalism was the cluster of attitudes which attempted to affirm values,
such as gentleness, kindness, and spirituality, that the society as a whole
was vigorously denying in its rush toward industrial capitalism. Douglas
argues that this sentimentalism stemmed from the influence of disestab-
lished women and ministers who, removed from any real economic and
political power in the early part of the century, used culture as an arena
for their private wars and interests. These interests included promoting
domestic, spiritual, noneconomic virtues, the only virtues they were al-
lowed to possess. The few authors who rebelled against sentimentalism
wrote about strident masculinity and avoided domesticity altogether, and
these are the authors regarded today as the classic American writers.®

All of these commentators find American novels to be unique, although
they differ somewhat on just what is unique about them. The premise
underlying all three arguments is the same: American society was funda-
mentally different from European, and this difference was reflected in,
and accounts for, the peculiar characteristics of American novels.
Intriguing though these discussions are, their methodology is open to
question. Lawrence treats just a few American classics, meaning those
works that were regarded as classics in his time, even though some, like
Moby Dick, were commercial and critical failures at their initial publica-
tion. Fiedler is wider ranging but equally selective. He pointedly disre-
gards novels about women or about men coping with society rather than
escaping it. This results in some blatant omissions, such as the absence
from his discussion of Edith Wharton, William Dean Howells, and most
of the works of Henry James, and excessive reliance on works that support
his case, such as Pierre. Douglas draws her support from wide but dis-
tinctly eclectic sources. Her argument rests on equating tough, masculine
novels with classic works and sentimental, domestic novels with forgotten
and forgettable works, yet one cannot prove the masculine = classic, fem-
inine = popular thesis by focusing on a few examples. Furthermore, her
argument is tautological: is Moby Dick high art because it is masculine?
because it didn’t sell well? She establishes no independent criteria for
separating classic from popular literature, but her case rests on making
just such a distinction.

Moreover, Victorian sentimentality was hardly an exclusively American
phenomenon, But all three of these analyses and most of their fellows
lack a comparative approach. Instead, they rely on talking about the
European novel or “the novel” as if its characteristics were beyond dis-
pute and as if European writers were turning out nothing else. It is mis-
leading to read all of American character from either Moby Dick or Fern
Leaves from Fanny’s Portfolio, but it is equally misleading to assume that
every European novel of the period was a Middlemarch or Madame Bovary.

Any attempt to read American character from American novels should
begin with a more systematic attempt to determine just what Americans
were writing and reading. Then, one must ask whether these American
novels were different from European novels, and how they compared with
our conception of the “standard novel” as the genre was formulated in
the 18th century. To the extent that the peculiar character of American
novels is substantiated, one should look for some possible causes for these
distinctive American traits other than simply some uniqueness of the
national psyche. Reflection theory is not necessarily wrong, but it can
be used to encompass more complex societal/literary relationships than
most of its proponents have thus far demonstrated.
TThe American Catalogue resulted from a project directed by F. Leypoldt for the
R. R. Bowker publishing house. The actual compilation, done by Lynds E. Jones,
was intended to include every book “in print and for sale (including reprints and
importations)” as of July 1, 1876. This initial volume appeared in 1880. It was fol-
lowed by seven others, which attempted to keep the Catalogue up to date by recording
what had been published since 1876. All books whose publication had been reported
in Publishers Weekly were listed. I was able to locate about three-quarters of the
novels selected from the Catalogue; the study made heavy use of the Interlibrary
Loan system. The remaining quarter either were not to be found in any libraries in
the interlibrary system or were not available for circulation. Thus the sample is biased
against obscure works not produced in great quantity or not deemed important
enough to be retained by libraries to the present day. This same bias may favor
European authors, whose works had to be of some popularity to be imported by
the American publishers in the first place. Regarding periodization, two volumes of
The American Catalogue were used for each of the four periods. Period II extends four
years beyond the Platt-Simmonds Act of 1891, which drastically changed the market
positions of American and foreign novels by extending international copyright pro-
tection to the latter in the United States. It seems reasonable to assume that it would
take about four years for the effect of international copyright to begin to be reflected
in the content of novels; any other cutoff point would have been equally arbitrary.
It was impossible to include popularity or sales as a variable of the sample novels
because of the lack of data. Several attempts to isolate the most popular books of
our period have been made; all of them acknowledge the speculative nature of trying
to identify a best-seller after the fact; see the discussions in Mott (1947), Hart ([1950]
1963), and Hackett (1977). Only five of the sample novels have been identified as
best-sellers: Seth Jones, The Hoosier Schoolmaster, Brewster's Millions, Beautiful Joe,
and Bob, Son of Battle. This number is too small to allow any meaningful compari-
sons with the larger sample, but one intriguing fact is that two of the five are dog
stories.
the public was reading, and editors earn their livings by knowing just
that. Therefore, a sample drawn from the population of novels published
may be assumed to have a close fit with the tastes of the contemporary
readership.

One further comment on the sample: because the foreign authors are
drawn only from those whose novels were published in the United States,
it might be argued that American editors were selecting a particular type
of foreign novel, in keeping with American tastes, and hence the foreign
works in the sample do not represent faithfully what was then being
published in England and elsewhere. Some selectivity undoubtedly took
place. But the actual results of the comparisons to be presented show
that the foreign novels in this study were in fact much like the traditional
18th-century novel; when deviations from the norm took place, they were
usually on the part of the American authors. And within the sample some
persistent differences between the American and the foreign authors do
appear. Thus, although it would be desirable to follow up this research
with an examination of novels actually published in England during the
same time, I am confident that some of the differences were imported
along with the texts.

The study began with two propositions. First, the overall differences
between American and foreign novels might be less impressive than has
often been supposed. The search for “the American novel” may in part
have been self-fulfilling. For in seeking some quintessentially American
literature, scholars must pass by The House of Mirth and seize upon
Huckleberry Finn because of the latter’s very uniqueness; novels like
The House of Mirth, dealing with marriage, money, and the social world,
are too indistinguishable from their European counterparts to lay claim
to being representative of “the American novel.” The Huck Finns and
Moby Dicks, although written originally for a market, as is every other
novel, become canonized as “classic American fiction,” and go off on a
special orbit, in which they are commented on by scholars, responded to
by writers, and used as the exemplars and measuring rods for American
fiction. Thus the distinction between the American novel as represented
by these classics and the European novel may be to a considerable extent
tautological. If it is, a comparison of a broad sample of American and
foreign novels, keeping in mind the norm set by 18th-century English
novelists, should reveal fewer differences of content and treatment than
the reflection-of-national-character theories would suggest.

My second proposition was that, to the extent that 19th-century Ameri-
can novels did contain a unique set of themes and subjects, it was neither
because American readers were not interested in novels about love and
marriage nor because American authors lacked the capacity to write such
novels. Instead, American authors had economic incentives to deviate
from the standard subjects of the genre. This hypothesis derives from
the history of American copyright legislation.

During most of the 19th century, American copyright laws protected
citizens or permanent residents of the United States but not foreign authors
(Clark 1960). The result was that British and other foreign works could
be reprinted and sold in the United States without royalties being paid
to their authors, while American authors did receive royalty payments.
Many interests in the United States benefited from this literary piracy
and lobbied to maintain the status quo. (Actually, piracy is something
of a misnomer, for the practice was perfectly legal.) The nascent printing
industry was kept busy. Publishers made huge profits from reprinting
foreign books. Readers had available the best foreign literature at low
prices; for example, in 1843 A Christmas Carol sold for 6¢ in the United
States and the equivalent of $2.50 in England.

Of course, the two groups injured by this happy state of affairs were
the European and the American authors. Native authors petitioned Con-
gress repeatedly, gave lectures, wrote letters, and tried mightily to move
a complacent public toward supporting international copyright. For, as
one contributor to Publishers Weekly put it, “What inducement has an
American publisher to publish original native works, and pay copyright
on them, when he has to compete with ten, fifteen, and twenty-cent reprint
editions of the best books in both current and standard English literature,
on which no copyright is paid?” (Cornwallis 1886). The answer was, no
inducement at all. American authors were thus excluded from much of
the fiction market, and most were unable to earn their livings from writing.

After almost a century of ineffective pressure from American authors
for legal relief from this competition, in 1891 the Platt-Simmonds Act
extended copyright to foreign authors. Ironically, the turnabout in Con-
gress was the consequence of the American publishers themselves being
undercut by printers of “cheap books,” those immensely popular, flimsy
reprints of classics and best-sellers, which flourished in the 1880s (Shove
1937).8 The pirates were being pirated. Unable to withstand this com-
petition, the major publishing houses suddenly became sensitive to the
moral justification for international copyright and successfully pushed the
passage of the act through Congress.

I contend that the choices American novelists made regarding the sub-
jects and themes of their novels, insofar as these choices differed from
those made by their foreign counterparts, were due less to the differences
8 Mott (1947) emphasizes the distinction between dime novels and cheap books. Dime
novels, as developed and marketed by Erastus F. Beadle in the 1860s, were original
works by American authors, whom we would today call hacks, writing specifically
for the dime-novel publications. Their popularity paved the way for the cheap books

of the 1870s and 1880s, which were reprints of foreign and, increasingly, American
authors of established reputation and marketability.
in American character or experience than to different market constraints.
American writers tended to be discouraged from writing about subjects
that European writers were treating, for the latter had a distinct market
advantage with American publishers. (An advantage that brought them
no benefits, of course.) Some American novelists tried to solve this problem
and win a publisher by writing about something different. In effect, the
American publishing industry became a filter which held back some Ameri-
can treatments of traditional subjects while allowing more unusual works
to get through to the reading public (Hirsch 1972; Escarpit 1971). Platt-
Simmonds erased the different market positions of the two groups of
authors, and the incentive for American authors to select nontraditional
subjects disappeared. Therefore, I hypothesized considerable thematic di-
vergence between the American novels and the foreign novels published
in the United States prior to 1891, and convergence after that year.

I looked at the differences between the American and foreign novels
of the sample during the four time periods, the first two falling largely
before Platt-Simmonds, the second two after. Four specific predictions are
based on the two initial propositions:

1. During the earlier periods, the novels by foreign authors should be
significantly cheaper than those by Americans; this difference should dis-
appear in the later periods.

2. For the earlier two periods, the sample should contain more foreign
novels than American ones; during the later periods the reverse should
be true.

3. Overall, there should be more consistency than variation between
the American and foreign authors’ novels, and both groups should resemble
the standard novel that deals with love, marriage, and money.

4. Some plot variations between the foreign and American novels in
the earlier two periods should decrease or disappear during the later two.
This decreased variation represents the hypothesized convergence follow-
ing 1891.
were considerably more expensive than those by foreign authors, their
respective average prices being $1.04 and $0.64 for the sample novels.
This difference was maintained in Period II, though in somewhat dimin-
ished strength. It was only during the last two periods that the foreign
novels exceeded the American ones in price. In Period III, foreign novels
averaged $1.25, American $1.17; while in Period IV, foreign novels sold
for an average $1.38, American for $1.22.

The cause of the abrupt switch in the relative prices of foreign and
native works was international copyright. Before 1891, foreign reprints
were both cheaper in the hardcover format and dominant in the cheap-
book field. Following 1891, foreign works were no longer less costly for
publishers to produce, cheapbooks disappeared, and foreign reprints began
to sell for slightly more than their American counterparts.®

The impact of international copyright was also reflected in the numbers
of American and foreign novels published. In 1894, for the first time, the
majority of novels published in the United States were by Americans
(Tebbel 1975, p. 687). The numbers of foreign and American authors of
the sample novels followed the expected pattern (table 1). Foreign authors
dominated during the first two periods and were in the minority thereafter.
Love, marriage, and seduction were the subjects of the 18th-century
novels. I was interested in seeing whether these original preoccupations
had persisted, and what forms they had taken by the time under con-
sideration.

Adult heterosexual love continued to be of overwhelming importance,
being the key to the plot in 55% of the sample novels and of considerable
importance in an additional 33%. The love complications usually revolved
around the question of marriage, important in 64% of the novels. Matters
of love and marriage generally worked out in satisfying, unsurprising ways.
Most often, the marriage took place as anticipated, though occasionally
one or both of the expected partners married someone else.

Other forms of love were given less, though considerable, attention.
Love between adult members of the same sex was seldom the center of
the novel’s action but was of some importance in over 40% of the novels,
and a similar proportion of them dealt with the love between an adult
and a child. And although love and marriage were nearly omnipresent,
seduction, the keystone of Richardson’s novels and many to follow, was
not a standard feature of the sample novels, figuring in about one-fifth of
the plots.

American and foreign authors did not differ in their emphases on love
and marriage, and both groups wrote about these subjects in the majority
of their novels. Nor was there any evidence of an increase or decrease of
stress on these subjects over time, although for both groups of authors
there was a slight decline in Period II. There were no differences between
American and foreign authors about the likelihood of the anticipated
marriage occurring, the emphasis on love between adult members of the
same sex, or the importance of love between adults and children. These
last two findings cast doubt on Fiedler’s stress on the homoeroticism of
American novels, on the one hand, and Douglas’s stress on the Americans’
excessive sentimentality, on the other.!°

Of the protagonists, 60% were male (table 2). Both American and
foreign authors generally favored heroes instead of heroines, and this over-
all male predominance occurred in all four periods. Although neither the
nationality of the author nor the period in which the novel was published
accounts for the masculine predominance among protagonists, there was
a strong relationship between the sex of the author and the sex of the
protagonist.

The Douglas “feminization” thesis does not seem to be supported in
the sample. The majority of both American (55%) and foreign authors
(64% ) were men. Men wrote about male protagonists in three-quarters of
their novels, and women wrote about women in more than one-half. The
difference between the two may indicate that, although it is easier for
any author to write about members of his or her own sex, male protagonists
were regarded as somewhat more interesting in general. Thus close to half
of the female authors were induced to write about heroes rather than
heroines.1”
Young adults constituted 60% of the protagonists, somewhat over 10%
were middle-aged, and an additional 10% were followed through several
stages of their lives. This emphasis on young adulthood, roughly defined
as 18-30, held true for both American and foreign novels and did not
change over time. The vast majority of our protagonists were single at
the beginning of their respective novels (table 3). By the end of the novels,
most were married or about to marry. Period II, with its lesser emphasis
on love and marriage, deviates from the pattern somewhat, but overall,
the trend for protagonists to exchange their initial single status for a
married one is clear.
class protagonists. Both groups of authors seemed to feel that working-
class characters were not likely to be interesting protagonists. The differ-
ence between American and foreign authors regarding the protagonist’s
class at the beginning of the novel was greatest in Period I and diminished
thereafter. The difference in outcomes was more persistent, Americans
being significantly more apt to have the hero or heroine end up in the
middle class during all periods except the third.

Sample protagonists rose in social ranking in about one-quarter of the
novels, occasionally descended, but usually (68%) stayed put. Again, a
breakdown by period is revealing. In the first period, American authors
were significantly more inclined to depict social mobility; 53% of the
American novels presented socially mobile protagonists, compared with
19% of the foreign novels. Hirene (Ames 1870) is typical: the heroine
starts out as the daughter of a poor but loving farm family, goes through
hardships as a hand in a New England textile mill, and ends up in a New
York mansion, married to the scion of one of the city’s old Dutch families.
Prison conditions, temperance, the treatment of women, the plight of
the poor, and cruelty to animals were subject to the reforming zeal of the
sample authors. Social reform was an important theme in 39% of the
American novels and 29% of the foreign ones. The difference between
the two groups of authors was greatest in the first period, when American
authors dealt with social reform in 69% of their novels, foreign authors
in 40% of theirs. Thereafter, the two groups converged, with about one-
quarter of their novels dealing with reform.

About one-third of both American and foreign novels were set in large
cities. Americans favored small towns as well, locating 30% of their novels
in small towns, a setting less popular with foreign authors (15%). The
American preference for small towns was strongest in Period I, in which
53% of their novels had small town settings. Few novels were set in the
wilderness and, contrary to the Fiedler and Lawrence arguments, Eu-
ropeans were slightly more likely to utilize wilderness settings (15%)
than were Americans (7%). Of the American novels, 75% were set in
the United States; of the foreign ones, most of them written by Europeans,
78% were set in Europe.

Foreign authors were likely to set their action in the home (57%),
Americans were likely to set it elsewhere (66%). This difference, per-
sisting through all four periods, seems to contradict the Douglas argument,
although Fiedler presumably would not be surprised. For both American
and foreign authors, the outdoors was the second most popular setting;
both groups used it for about one-quarter of their novels. The Americans
also set another quarter of their novels in institutions other than the home,
such as the penitentiary of “9009” (Hopper and Bechdolt 1909) or the
New England women’s college of Two College Girls (Brown 1889).

The action generally took place in the present or the immediate past.
Foreign authors showed somewhat more interest in exploring the remote
past, especially in the first two periods, in which about one-quarter of the
foreign novels took place before the 19th century. The difference disap-
peared in the last two periods.

Money, the necessity of having it, its acquisition, and occasionally its
loss, was a central element in 57% of the plots. During the first three
periods there was a considerable difference between American and foreign
authors, with the latter writing about money in three-quarters of their
novels, Americans in about half. Period IV shows an unexplained drop in
the importance of money in foreign novels (27%), so while convergence
may be taking place, the trend is by no means clear.

About one-third of the sample novels dealt with religion, and there
seems to have been an uneven decline in its importance over the 35 years.
The American and foreign authors, Douglas and Lawrence to the contrary
notwithstanding, were equally likely to write about religion. Supernatural
elements, the ghosts and gothic devices that Fiedler argued Americans
substituted for the excitements of passionate adult love, played a role in
only 15% of the novels. Foreign authors were somewhat more likely to
include supernatural elements during the first two periods than were Amer-
icans; during the last two periods, the two groups converged.

Humor is often cited as a characteristic of American literature. Al-
though only 11% of the sample novels contained significant humor, the
American novels were slightly more apt to be humorous (16%) than the
foreign ones (6%). This difference between the two groups of authors
was most pronounced in the first two periods, during which no humorous
novels by foreign authors appeared in the sample.

Nonwhite characters appeared in about one-third of the novels; Ameri-
cans were more likely to include them, especially in the last two periods,
during which a number of Asian characters appear in American novels
(table 5). In general, Americans tended to write about blacks, while
foreign authors divided their attention among blacks, American Indians,
and other racial minorities. Americans were more apt to write about uni-
dimensional figures, the minority character being purely evil, virtuous,
humorous, or appearing only in a supporting, servant role. Foreign authors,
although less apt to include a nonwhite character, seemed more inclined
to endow those they did include with some degree of complexity.

The following summarizes the similarities, differences, and convergences
discussed in this section:

Areas of consistency between the two author groups:
Protagonist’s marital status at beginning
Protagonist’s marital status at end
Protagonist’s age
Protagonist’s sex
Protagonist’s overall character
Protagonist’s social interaction
Importance of adult, male/female love
Importance of marriage
Importance of adult love between members of the same sex
Importance of adult/child love
Importance of religion
Importance of heredity
Importance of seduction
Urban settings

Areas of convergence after initial differences:

Social mobility of protagonist
Protagonist beginning in middle class
Importance of social reform

Use of small town settings

Use of the remote past

Importance of supernatural
Presence of humor

Importance of money (?)

Areas of persistent differences between the two author groups:

Setting (American vs. European)
Treatment of race (increasing divergence)
Use of domestic settings

Protagonist ending up in middle class
1971). Reflection has been a popular metaphor in the attempt to explain
recalcitrant literary phenomena. This study demonstrates the need for an
expanded conception of how literature reflects the social world.

What have the sample novels reflected? The most consistent finding is
the mutual resemblance among the novels, both between those by American
and by foreign authors and among those of all four periods. And, lest this
be regarded as an artifact introduced by American publishers seeking any
novels, native or foreign, that catered to some unique American reading
tastes, one should remember that the characteristics shared by the sample
novels are much the same as the 18th-century archetypal features of the
genre. Like their forerunners, the sample novels are about love and mar-
riage, money and social life. Their protagonists start out single and end
up married. They operate in a complex social world familiar to their
readers, they are basically virtuous, they encounter a sequence of emo-
tional and moral dilemmas, they often improve their lot.

This resistance to changes of subject matter that novels seem to possess
is especially striking when one considers the self-imposed limits of the
genre, the many things about which novelists do not write. Missing most
conspicuously is material related to work, such as career histories or the
depiction of on-the-job working relationships. Also missing is an intensive
examination of married life, posthoneymoon, especially as it involves the
rearing of children; this may be the feminine counterpart to the absence
of novelistic treatment of male work. While it is true that novels present
much of the quotidian detail of life, only a brief phase of life seems to be
of interest: the stage when the young adult is making decisions regarding
a marriage partner. Once this critical juncture has been passed, the next
40 or 50 years presumably take care of themselves. Novels are practical
comedies: they end with a marriage, and are much concerned with money
and with other means of achieving that marriage.1?

Much of this continuity of subject matter can be explained by con-
sidering what I shall call the imperatives of the genre. The novelist has
a formal problem very different from those of the playwright or poet. In-
asmuch as lines of prose do not require sounding out and their individual
words do not, as a rule, demand close attention, prose can be read quickly
and without intense concentration on the part of the reader. Reading
poetry is hard work (although, Johan Huizinga [(1950) 1955] would
add, it is also play). Reading novels is easy.

But the fact that novels are long means that they are normally not
consumed in one sitting. Novels require a considerable investment of
time, and several decisions to sit down and read rather than do something
else. This poses a formal problem for the novelist: he needs not only to
attract the initial interest of his reader but also to influence a subsequent
series of decisions. Working within such a genre, the novelist cannot
orchestrate an emotional tension and release, such as that of tragic cathar-
sis; he cannot set the stage and structure the emotional experience to
provide his audience a brief transportation to another world. The novelist’s
problem is to interest the reader enough so that he keeps deciding to pick
up the novel again and to enable the reader to slip easily back into the
novel’s world at almost any point.

One device by which the novelist can facilitate easy reentry into his
novel is to include in it a number of connection points with the reader’s
own life and experiences. Love, money, marriage decisions, familiar terrain,
and a recent time period—all of these are immediately recognizable to
the average reader. Literature transports, but the readers of novels are
not transported very far. These multiple connections with the reader’s own
experience enable him to pick up the novel after several days’ neglect and
quickly reenter the world of its characters, for it is a world very much
like his own.

But the connection points must also be able to attract the average
reader’s interest in the first place. Most aspects of most lives are not
sufficiently dramatic to satisfy the need for escape that we desire in an
aesthetic experience. The novelist must write about some aspect of com-
mon life that is emotionally engaging, that arouses his reader’s feelings
and curiosity. And this curiosity must ultimately be satisfied, so the
novelist needs a subject that lends itself to dramatic shaping by having
a distinct climax and resolution.

Love, especially love associated with the selection and winning of a
marriage partner, is the perfect solution. It is familiar to most readers,
it is full of intense feeling and emotional conflict, and—unlike working
life or child rearing, which share those two features—it reaches a definite
resolution. When recounting a love affair or possible marriage, one can
always say “how it turned out.” Love and marriage solve the novelist’s
formal problem by offering both connection points and dramatic structure.
The imperatives of the genre compel many novelists to give love and
marriage an inordinate amount of attention, disproportionate to the amount
of time they occupy in most people’s actual experience. The sample novels
reflect this. Many of the resemblances among novels stem from these
formal imperatives.

But although the sample novels share a preoccupation with love and
marriage, they also exhibit some differences between the works of Ameri-
can and foreign authors. Most of these differences—social reform themes,
the class of the protagonist, the concentration on small towns, the depiction
of the remote past, the treatment of money, the presence of humor—follow
a common pattern: the difference between the American and the foreign
authors is most marked during the first one or two periods, and during
the later periods the two groups converge. In many cases of early diver-
gence, it was the American authors who deviated from what we regard
as the standard subjects and treatments of the novel, writing more about
social reform and less about money, using more humor, and so forth.

If these differences had persisted over all four periods, they might have
constituted a reflection of some peculiarities of the American character
or experience. But the pattern of differences in the 1870s, which then con-
verge sometime in the 1890s, supports the proposition that what was being
reflected in the initial differences were the different market positions oc-
cupied by the American and the foreign authors. Both were subject to
the imperatives of the genre and the traditions of the novel. But the
American authors had greater incentive to deviate from the norm, to write
on nontraditional themes that the European authors had not effectively
monopolized. After 1891, there was no longer the same incentive for
deviation, the novelistic imperatives took over, and the American authors
swung into line with everyone else. So in addition to reflecting imperatives
of the genre, the novels reflected differential market positions brought
about by the state of American copyright laws.!4

Concerning race, social class, and the use of domestic settings, as well
as national setting, the sample showed persistent differences between the
American and foreign novels. These differences support a “literature re-
flects national character” argument and point the way toward further
research. The difference with respect to race is perhaps the easiest to
explain. Both in the tendency to include minority characters and in the
unidimensional treatment of them, American novels were different. This
difference may reflect the American experience with racial minorities, non-
white persons being present in the life of the average American to a far
greater extent than they were for the average European. It may reflect
also a national uneasiness about race, a need to categorize racial minorities
into stereotyped roles so as to avoid encountering them as full, complex
human personalities. Two specific historical events of the late 19th cen-
tury may be playing a part here: the consolidation of Jim Crow laws
some 20 years after Reconstruction, and the American imperial adventures
in the Far East and the Caribbean. Both of these confronted Americans
with the issue of their relationship with other races yet made it desirable
to deny the full humanity of nonwhite persons in order to escape the
moral contradiction that would follow if the nonwhites were regarded as
equals. I would hypothesize that the American treatment of racial mi-
norities, qualitatively thinner but quantitatively greater than that of for-
eign authors, persisted until the mid-20th century, reflecting what has
long been called a peculiarly “American dilemma.” Similar “reflection of
American character’? accounts might be developed, and tested, for the
relative American preference for middle-class protagonists and disinclina-
tion toward domestic settings.

Thus I have tried to show that while reflection is a convenient metaphor
with which to conceptualize the links between a society and its literature,
we need a model of reflection complex enough to encompass all of the
various types of reflection. Even if we confine ourselves to regarding
literature as a dependent variable, which is to look at, in Weber’s words,
“only one side of the causal chain,” we find reflection not to be simply as
in A below:
I.

II.

Il.

Characteristics of protagonist:

Sex

Age

Class at beginning of novel

Class at end

Interactions with other people

Character (ultimate)

Initial presentation

Heredity as factor in determining character
Marital status at beginning of novel

Marital status at end of novel

Questions pertaining to love, marriage, seduction:
Adult love—male/female—importance to plot
Adult love—same sex—importance to plot

Love between adult and child—importance to plot
Marriage’s importance to plot

Does the anticipated marriage occur

Was seduction a significant element in the plot of the novel
Questions pertaining to plot and treatment:
Setting of main action

Location of main action

Time period during which novel is set

Location of general action

Location of climactic scenes

Importance of money in the novel

Importance of religion in novel

Importance of supernatural (ghosts, voices, visions, dreams, etc.)
Importance of social reform theme in novel

What nonwhite characters, if any, appeared in the novel
How were the nonwhite characters presented

Did this novel seem intentionally humorous
long time to read. Even under the injunction to skim, looking for certain
elements for coding, readers required two to three hours per novel for just
reading, summary preparation, and coding. The project was feasible only
with multiple readers/coders, of whom there were 10. Hence problems of
reliability had to be addressed.

Reliability controls included training, checking, and keeping obscure
the original hypotheses. First, the project began with all of the coders
reading and coding the same novels and discussing the reasons for what-
ever differences appeared in their coding. Some questions were straight-
forward, for example, the sex of the protagonist; for questions requiring
more judgment on the part of the coder, we developed a series of decision
rules. For example, several questions ask whether something such as money
“was important in the novel.” Our rule here was, if the plot would be
considerably different in the absence of this element, code it as significant;
if the element is occasionally discussed but is not necessary to the devel-
opment of the plot, code as insignificant. All questionable codings were
brought up and discussed by the group; I made the final decision in am-
biguous cases. (Some of the questions that arose were quite unforeseen,
such as, “How should we code protagonist age, sex, and class when the
protagonist is a dog?’’) I think an acceptable degree of standardization
of our coding was achieved by this procedure.

Second, each coder wrote a detailed summary of the plot for each novel.
Other project members read each summary and compared it with the cod-
ing for the novel; questions that arose were reconciled with the original
coder.

Finally, none of the coders knew the nature of the comparisons I was
interested in making. Nor, usually, did they know any author characteris-
tics beyond perhaps sex, for the author’s origins were coded after the
novel’s contents. Thus it is reasonably sure that no bias in favor of the
hypotheses was present.

Despite the efforts to increase reliability and prevent bias, data on
the content of novels are inevitably messier than, say, data on voting
patterns. I have not imposed sophisticated statistical tests beyond those
the data warranted. As footnote 11 indicates, I think it is appropriate to
err on the side of modesty in using such data. In the exploration of in-
teresting questions, sometimes less than perfect techniques must be
tolerated.

I would be happy to provide the full coding sheets and the list of sample
novels on request.
REFERENCES

Albrecht, Milton. 1954. “The Relationship of Literature and Society.” American
Journal of Sociology 59:425-36.

Ames, Mary Clemmer. 1870. Eirene. New York: Putnam.

Brown, Helen Dawes. 1889. Two College Girls. Boston: Ticknor.

Cipolla, Carolo M. 1969. Literacy and Development in the West. Harmondsworth,
Middlesex: Penguin.

Clark, Priscilla P. 1977. “Stratégies d’auteur au XIXe siécle.” Romantisme 17-18:92-
102.

. 1979, “Literary Culture in France and the United States.” American Journal
of Sociology 84:1057-77.

Clark, Robert J. 1960. The Movement for International Copyright in Nineteenth Cen-
tury America. Washington, D.C.: Catholic University Press.

Cornwallis, Kinahan. 1886. “International Copyright: A Copyright Law Wanted to
Stimulate American Literature.” Publishers Weekly 29:106.

Dorius, R. J. 1965. “Comedy.” Pp. 143-47 in Princeton Encyclopedia of Poetry and
Poetics. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Douglas, Ann. 1978. The Feminization of American Culture. New York: Avon.

Ennis, Philip H. 1965. Adult Book Reading in the United States. Chicago: National
Opinion Research Center.
Escarpit, Robert. 1971. Sociology of Literature. 2d ed. Translated by Ernest Pick.
London: Cass.

Fiedler, Leslie. 1966. Love and Death in the American Novel. Rev. ed. New York:
Dell.

Gallup, George. 1972. The Gallup Poll: Public Opinion 1935-1971. New York: Ran-
dom House.

Goldman, Lucien. 1967. “The Sociology of Literature: Status and Problems of Meth-
od.” International Social Science Journal 19:493-516.

Hackett, Alice Payne, and James Henry Burke. 1977. 80 Years of Best Sellers: 1895-
1975. New York: Bowker.

Hart, James D. (1950) 1963. The Popular Book: A History of America’s Literary
Taste. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.

Hirsch, Paul M. 1972. “Processing Fads and Fashions: An Organization-Set Analysis
of Cultural Industry Systems.” American Journal of Sociology 77:639-59.

Hopper, James, and Fred Bechdolt. 1909. “9009.” New York: Moffat.

Huizinga, Johan. (1950) 1955. Homo Ludens. Boston: Beacon.

Ingraham, J. H. 1876. Frank Rivers, or The Dangers of the Town. New York: DeWitt.

Knight, Douglas M., and E. Shepley Nourse. 1969. Libraries at Large. New York:
Bowker.

Lawrence, D. H. (1923) 1977. Studies in Classic American Literature. New York:
Penguin.

Lowenthal, Leo. 1961. Literature, Popular Culture, and Society. Englewood Cliffs,
N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

Marx, Leo. 1964. The Machine in the Garden. New York: Oxford University Press.

Mathews, Virginia H. 1973. “Adult Reading Studies: Their Implications for Private,
Professional, and Public Policy.” Library Trends 22:149-76.

Mott, Frank Luther. 1947. Golden Multitudes. New York: Macmillan.

Peterson, Richard A. 1979. “Revitalizing the Culture Concept.” Annual Review of
Sociology 5:137-66.

Publishers Weekly. 1876-1910.

Sharon, Amiel T. 1973-74. “What Do Adults Read?” Reading Research Quarterly
9:148-69.

Shove, Raymond Howard. 1937. Cheap Book Production in the United States, 1870
to 1891. Urbana: University of Illinois Library.

Smith, Henry Nash. 1978. Democracy and the Novel. New York: Oxford University
Press.

Steinberg, S. H. (1974) 1977. Five Hundred Years of Printing. 3d ed. Harmonds-
worth, Middlesex: Penguin.

Tebbel, John. 1975. A History of Book Publishing in the United States. Vol. 2, The
Expansion of an Industry, 1865-1919. New York: Bowker.

Watt, Ian. (1957) 1974. The Rise of the Novel. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University
of California Press.

White, H. C., and C. A. White. 1965. Canvases and Careers. New York: Wiley.

Williams, Raymond. 1966. Culture and Society, 1780-1950. New York: Harper & Row.

Wright, Will. 1975. Six Guns and Society. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of
California Press.

Yankelovich, Skelly, and White. 1978. Study prepared for the Book Industry Con-
sulting Group, summarized in Publishers Weekly 214:16.
