Change Rules

Author(s): Jézsef Bérécz

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 106, No. 4 (January 2001), pp. 1152-1168
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/320303

Accessed: 08-06-2016 04:38 UTC
In Making Capitalism without Capitalists, Gil Eyal, Ivan Szelényi, and
Eleanor Townsley (1998) bridge a vast distance by linking some findings
of a 1993 synchronic multicountry stratification survey of Central and
Eastern Europe to a neo-Weberian, comparative-historical argument
about social change. In Postsocialist Pathways, David Stark and Laszl6
Bruszt (1998) embed the highlights of Stark’s earlier work on institutional
change in the macropolitics of policy choice and the micropolitics of man-
agerial clique action. Michael Burawoy’s essay offers a largely metalevel
critique of those two book-length sociological reflections on social change
after state socialism.’ Szelényi, Stark, and Burawoy are leading American
sociologists who conduct comparative-historical work on the transfor-
mations of that part of Europe formerly controlled by the Soviet Union.

This discussion allows us to open a more generic debate about com-
parative-historical sociology’s models of social change. This is important
because the comparative-historical approach offers an opportunity to con-
sider social change in the present without the high-modernist assumption,
burdening much of sociology, that present modernity has in effect “erased”
(Burawoy, p. 1106) the past. It makes it possible to assess the role of
external influences in social change and allows brisk movement among
institutional effects of different levels of abstraction, thus promising anal-
THE “EAST” IS WEST

Even our geographical focus is elusive. Difficulties emerge on two levels:
naming and grasping.

Naming.—As the intellectual historian Larry Wolff (1994) articulates,
the idea of “Eastern” Europe has been a prime example of disdained and
patronized alterity at least since the Enlightenment.’ The 19th-century
imperial-scholarly exercise of orientalism (Said 1978) inaugurated the
“West’s” grand underlying qualitative contrast to an exocitized Other in
the “East.” Wolff portrays an Enlightenment thought that created, pos-
sibly even before the onset of Orientalism, another form of alterity: a
quantitatively inferioralized sense of otherness located within the “West”
itself. The label of a capitalized “Eastern Europe” denotes a set of societies,
separate and unequal, that are undeniably Western in their ways but
inferior in their achievements. Economic history suggests that the key
dimension of that inferiority lays with those societies’ subordinate position
in the world economy—so much so that the very concept of
(semi)periphery was devised partly to refer to their experience during the
emergence of capitalism in Europe (see, e.g., Wallerstein 1974, p. 103).

Because of the sense of inferiority connoting the label, the symbolic
geography of the region has been subject to extended debates among social
historians and other specialists.‘ The label “Eastern Europe” evokes an
ambiguity of meaning depending on which of the two notions of “east-
ernness” is launched: either “non-” or “inferior” Europe. In this context,
the adjective “central” often ends up serving as a mere euphemism.°

This double (qualitative and quantitative) notion of “east-west” alterity
dominated the intellectual world of Western Europe at the birth of the
social sciences. Much of the oeuvre of the Central European—German,
Italian, Austrian, Polish, or Hungarian—classics of sociology can only be
understood as reactions to the striking mismatch between the streamlined
Western theoretical imageries, interpreted as universal patterns of mo-
dernity, and the dizzying maze of their societies’ empirical patterns that
were supposed to be mapped on each other in this new, generic—that is,
nonnational—science of the social form. Were sociology a truly compar-
ative-historical social science—instead of knowledge production locked,
as if by default, into methodological nationalism, Western solipsism, or
both—sociologists would focus on social practices outside the narrow
limits of West Europe and North America. The fact that, so far, main-
stream Western sociology has failed to do so contributes greatly to its
severe problems of relevance outside of the Western core (see, e.g., Alatas
1995, 2001). A similar argument applies to the way in which sociology
has sadly “retreated into the present” (Elias 1987).

As a result, more than 10 years after the collapse of the Iron Curtain,
the idea of a shared, global field of reflexive practice addressing the variety
of modern capitalist experience that includes both the eastern half of
Europe and North America, as well as other parts of the globe, is utopian.
Eastern Europe is widely thought of, in North American and West Eu-
ropean academia, as an external area. It is never the subject, and rarely
even the object, of any comprehensive, comparative-historical discussion
of the social form. This exclusion of the circumstances outside the Western
core of the capitalist world economy renders sociology’s claims for uni-
versality and genericness sadly untrue.®

Had Eyal et al. linked their justification for a neoclassical sociology to
an explicit critique of the oversimplified conceptualizations and the West-
ern focus of our discipline—instead of positing the second coming of
capitalism in the impure sociological laboratory called Eastern Europe—I
suspect their call for a neoclassical sociology would have prompted an
enthusiastic embrace from Burawoy. In that case, the analogy with neo-
classical economics (a charge that is, in my reading, a nominalist mis-
understanding of Eyal et al. and an exaggeration for Stark and Bruszt)
would have also been avoided. A specifically sociological kind of neo-
classical interest, not tainted with the influence of economics but empha-
sizing the analytical primacy of the social, can be defined as that enterprise
which seeks to provide more inclusive formulae for the fundamental ques-
tions of modernity first addressed so imperfectly by the classics (for an
attempt in this vein, see Bérécz [1997b]). Most pertinent to the subject
matter at hand are such issues as the necessity and directionality of change,
the dialectics of change and constancy, and the contingency and dimen-
sionality of institutional change. If, as a shorthand, we take the term
“classic(al)” to denote a body of scholarship that cannot be avoided, a
neoclassical approach means addressing explicitly the fundamental, for-
mative concerns of such scholarship using the empirical materials of the
present day.

Grasping.—Because of the complex social-institutional patterns in
which they have articulated structures, agents, ideologies, and practices
of capitalism, nationhood, statehood, and identity, the societies of this
unnameable part of Europe have always called for sociology in the com-
parative-historical mode. The institutional variation in late-state-socialism
is the basis of Stark and Bruszt’s justification for their choice of a strategy
that contrasts the Central European societies’ “paths of extrication” from
state socialism. That is, however, in apparent logical conflict with their
refusal to conceptualize social change in generic terms, a shortcoming that
weakens the power of Stark and Bruszt’s well-taken insistence on a com-
parative approach to capitalisms. This comparative strategy reifies East
European regionality and obscures the similarities of the Central Euro-
pean processes to other experiences of social change. By insisting on the
differences in the paths of extrication within Central and Eastern Europe,
Stark and Bruszt implicitly problematize the usefulness of more far-rang-
ing comparisons (e.g., the use of the Hungarian experience of the late
1960s and the early 1980s as a theoretical key to understanding contem-
porary China and the easy hops between Hungary and Russia in some
of the literature on post-state-socialism, including Burawoy’s essay).’ Even
more significant, this variety of state socialist social practices has the
potential of diminishing the very raison d’étre of the entire enterprise of
post-state-socialist sociology by blurring its point of departure, the solid,
singular image of “the” (state) socialist (communist, etc.) status quo that
serves, in turn, as Stark and Bruszt’s main justification for comparing
only post-state-socialist instances of social change to each other.

As Judit Bodnar (2001) notes, the comparative-historical sociology of
state socialism has faced a severe collinearity problem by dealing with
societies that were state socialist, thus representing a modernist version
of high modernity whose institutional patterns were somewhat (although
not entirely) at odds with patterns of Western capitalist societies; histor-
ically specific and thus culturally somewhat, although not completely, at
variance with their Western counterparts (which were of course quite
varied themselves); and globally located, that is, very much part of an
overarching project of global capitalist, great-power, imperialist modern-
ity that featured some Western societies in a prominent, core position.

These three dimensions overlap so much that the decomposition of their
effects is impossible by empirical methods. Furthermore, the oppressive-
ness of political practices in these countries was foregrounded, while their
achievements (e.g., centripetal mobility in the world-system, increases in
collective consumption, impressive extensions of social policy, etc.), and
the effects of historical-cultural and global-macrostructural factors were
systematically suppressed in the “totalitarianism” perspective dominant
CONTINGENT CLOSURE

Conceptual collinearity has haunted much of the sociological study of the
current transformation: decomposing the effects of the region’s
(semi)peripheral position in the world economy, its peculiar sociocultural
heritage, and its immediate state socialist past is extremely difficult.
Clearly, Central Europe’s historical experience is both quite relevant to
what ought to be the mainstream of sociology—theoretically inquisitive
comparative-historical analysis—and slightly “off” from the Western
mainstream in its morphological pattern. Here I outline three dimensions
of a framework that could illuminate the Central European experience,
with special attention to the historical dimension.

My analysis can be organized around social closure, that is, the insti-
tutional process “whereby one group monopolizes advantages by closing
off opportunities to another group” (Murphy 1988, p. 8).”? What ties the
two books and Burawoy’s review together is precisely their treatment of
different modalities of closure:

1. Stark and Bruszt focus on transformations in the rules that regulate
property, a centrally important, complex institution of closure under
capitalism.

2. Eyal et al. devote their analysis mainly to understanding the selection
mechanisms that structure the placement of individuals in managerial
positions (those in position that exercise control over productive as-
sets), appended by a treatise on “managerialism,” a macro-institu-
tional-level theory.

3. Burawoy’s essay above criticizes both works for ignoring what he
sees as the privileged site of closure under capitalism: class relations
viewed from the position of the exploited.
and political science models by transposing the overtly teleological concept
of “transitions” (to “market” or “democracy” and sometimes both). The
concept of “transitions” was abandoned gradually, first with such inten-
tionally unbalanced metaphors as the “transition from socialism,” (e.g.,
Rona-Tas 1994; Hillmann 1994) echoed in Stark and Bruszt’s “paths of
extrication” (1998), later in favor of the nonteleological language of “trans-
formation(s)” (R6éna-Tas 1997; also Stark’s multiple works) and the “un-
certain transition” (Burawoy and Verdery 1999). “Path dependence” was
useful in helping the analysis of social change move away from brash
teleology: the term accounts for the idea that “the past matters.” That
statement is only surprising, of course, if at any point we entertained the
idea—ludicrous to comparative-historical sociology—that it may not. Yet,
path dependence was a useful antidote to the venom of teleology in
transition.

Just a small step away from the ahistoricity of economic models, path
dependence offers a very restrictive model of social change: plainly stated,
it suggests simply that the state of an institution at any time is influenced
(or, in more sanguine variants, it is determined) by the state of that in-
stitution at a preceding time.’° It argues that, once a lock-in mechanism
is in effect, change is difficult. It says nothing about how difficult it is
and why, whether it is equally difficult for all institutions and types of
social organizations, how the difficulty of change is reduced or amplified,
why change occurs at all, or how we recognize an effective, path-depen-
dence producing lock-in mechanism when we see one (other than labeling
examples of institutional resilience to change “path dependent” in retro-
spect). Comparative historiography, theoretical history, historical anthro-
pology, and even historical sociology have done much to develop sensitive
conceptual tools to capture the many possible roles of the past in present
social change; the absence of such considerations from this literature is
quite remarkable.

Read in these terms, much of David Stark’s work on post-state-so-
cialism can be summarized as a move away from an emphasis on path
dependence toward the contingency of social change and the examination
of politics as a terrain in which locking in and change are acted out (cf.
Stark 1992 with Stark and Bruszt 1998). Just as institutional economist
Janos Kornai’s (1992) verdict on the economic system he calls, inter-
changeably, “socialism” and “communism” is based on the binary contrast
of formation theory (“capitalism” vs. “communism-socialism”), Eyal et al.’s
argument of post-state-socialist “managerialism” considers the specific in-
stitutional legacy of state socialism as the only theoretically significant
variable that explains a post-state-socialist outcome (thus shielding both
pre-state-socialist historical, cultural, or political legacies and synchronic
external effects as possible contributing causes). In that sense, even though
they do not identify with path dependence, the internal structure of their
argument is reminiscent of it: What matters most in the current trans-
formation of the object (say, post-state-socialist Hungary) is the imme-
diately preceding state of that object (state-socialist Hungary). That is
especially visible in Eyal et al.’s causal linking of managerial success
during the first phase of property change to the intellectuals’ New Class
project of a good two decades before (see Konrad and Szelényi 1974;
Szelényi 1986-87; Bérécz 1989, 1993). This is noticeable especially if con-
trasted with Eyal et al.’s analysis of the complex legacies of Biirgertum
and Bourdieuesque-Colemanian capitals, in which they employ a much
more complex sociohistorical toolkit than path dependence. A similar
notion is expressed in David Stark’s suggestive metaphor of the new
institutions being built not just on, but with the ruins of socialism (Stark
1996), the main idea behind the suggestive concept of “recombinant prop-
erty” (Stark and Bruszt 1998, chap. 5).”"

Eyal et al.’s theoretical move, of embedding the “capitals” framework
in a sociohistorical argument developed from a Weberian notion of Stand,
evokes two generic considerations related to the analytical consequences
of conceptual streamlining. Eyal et al. explicitly reject the moderniza-
tionist framework: “The distinction between tradition and modernity is
unhelpful in understanding what socialism was” (1998, p. 67). Their point
of departure is a double equation: “Weber is a historical sociologist who
describes two distinct logics of stratification: rank order [Stand] and class
stratification [Klasse]” (p. 67). From this they argue that rank and class
always embed and contextualize each other, with some elements of their
individual-based features, modeled as “capitals,” dominant. They see
“pourgeoisness” (Biirgertum) divided into property-based (Besitzbiirger-
tum) and education-based (Bildungsbiirgertum) components that have, in
the “belated” part of Europe, represented not just analytical categories
but distinct social groupings. They argue that a longue durée pattern of
the predominance of the education-based bourgeoisie is detectable in the
results of a comparative multisociety survey and explains the success of
the late-state-socialist managerial elites in retaining their positions at the
top of enterprises after 1989.

“Rank,” however, is quite a reduced reading of Weber’s analysis of
Stand. Depending on the theoretical intent of the analysis of social closure,
the concept of Stand can be read with at least three different sets of
meanings. It can be interpreted, in the context of a historicist-idiographic
analysis, as “estate,” denoting a multiplicity of overlapping legal and social
distinctions, such as the medieval estates, denominational groups, pro-
fessional groups, and various constellations of ethnic distinctions, patterns
of geographic “rootedness” and mobility, and linguistic practices. On the
positivist-nomothetic extreme, we find the received notion of “status” so
predominant in the North American sociometry of stratification, which
assumes free movement among these positions and models empirical pat-
terns of inequality in such movement. The area proper for comparative-
historical sociology, the conceptual midpoint between the two extremes,
is occupied by the notion of “contingent closure”—that reading of Stand
in which new institutions are created by the mixing of elements that are
supplied by history but in which neither the past, nor any other single
dimension of power, overdetermines the outcome.”

“Rank” reproduces one side of the two-sided coin of Stand. As his key
passage on stdndische Lage testifies,’ Weber’s model of Stand includes
clear references to relational features (such as the social organization of
marriage or even communal eating) as much as such ranking mechanisms
as prestige and privilege, along with life conduct that can be read as both
a network and a ranking mechanism; I offer an illustration of these in
figure 1. In it, I added the distinction of conflict/cooperation under “net-
work mechanisms” and introduced the distinction of formal/informal
mechanisms to allow for examination of the claim, raised by a number
of scholars, concerning the predominance of informality, especially infor-
mal network assets, in the transformation.’ The reduction of Stand into
“rank” makes us focus only on the right-hand side of this graph. The
“rank” reading loses a sense of sociability and groupness that is very much
part of the original Weberian notion.’*

Bourdieu’s and Coleman’s notions of capitals (as in cultural capital,
social capital, political capital, etc.) have resonated in mainstream soci-
ology because they can be used as replacements for the positivist notion
of status while allowing a modicum of analytical historicity and sociability.
The notion of “conversion mechanisms” preempts criticisms, often raised
against stratification research, that its evidence consists of mere statistical
artifacts. Instead, the notion of conversion posits actual social mechanisms
that transpose forms of capital while creating space for a historical analysis
of the accumulation of those forms of capital.

Capital clearly represents a step away from the abstract formalism of
stratification analysis. The trouble is that, as students of political economy
will no doubt notice, this metaphorical use of the term capital forgets
about one set of institutional-level complications—the distinction between
wealth and capital. That distinction rests on the idea that not all forms
of wealth are relevant for capitalist accumulation: wealth needs to become
capital and be valorized, which involves its subjection to a specific social
institution called, depending on the context of the analysis, the production
process, the capital-labor relation, exploitation, or the appropriation of
surplus labor. The valorization of capital represents a very narrow strip
of institutional alternatives in which accumulated wealth can be ex-
pended. Much of what happens with accumulated value is final con-
sumption or thesauration—outside of the realm of capitalist accumulation
per se.

The metaphors of cultural, political, or social capital provide no theory
of valorization. They do not distinguish among various uses—profit-
making versus wastefulness—of the capitals they denote. To be noted also
is the fact that the core social content of at least two of those capi-
tals—social network ties and knowledge as a reflexive and creative linkage
to the world—are widely valued and enjoyed in their noninstrumental
form, in and for the sake of themselves, without their being launched in
purposive-instrumental social action in the interest of seeking social po-
sition. Another shortcoming of the language of capitals—which allows its
use in stratification analysis—is its frequent reduction to a trait of indi-
viduals rather than collectivities (Portes 1998; Portes and Landolt 2000).

Finally, all three of the metaphorical capitals are different from eco-
nomic wealth/capital when they are launched, even under the most
rational-instrumental conditions. When cultural, social, or political capital
is activated, there is no direct, “accountable” loss to the actor who applies
it. Meanwhile, social and political capital can be lost or radically devalued
in social mechanisms that have nothing to do with their valorization. In
fact, nonuse is likely the most frequent cause of the depletion of social,
cultural, and political capital. In addition, cultural “capital,” and also some
forms of political and social “capital,” are “sticky”: they may be quite
difficult to pass on. As a result of a combination of nondepletion on being
launched, the general lack of interchangeability among the three capitals,
their resilience to transitivity, and the absence of a general measure of
exchange value, they fail to lend themselves to any sense of rational
bookkeeping or calculation. Thus it appears that capitals are an elegant
but oversimplified economism. My sense is that Eyal et al. rely on this
language for two reasons: first, they need to provide a link between the
survey-based evidence regarding personnel changes at top managerial
positions (a set of individual-level observations) and their institutional-
level argument of historical change; second, because their “rank” reading
of Stand lacks a relational component, which they supply through the
notion of social capital.

Burawoy criticizes both volumes for their insufficient emphasis on class
relations. In Marx, the term “class” is used in at least three, mutually
incompatible meanings, depending on the context. The dichotomous-
antagonistic notion of class struggle of his political theory differs from
the tripartite, descriptive political-economic idea he uses for some de-
scription of 19th-century capitalism (in which the working class, capi-
talists, and the rentier class are grouped according to the main source of
their livelihood). In his narratives about past societies, Marx refers to a
large number of “class” locations in a highly idiographic-descriptive fash-
ion. Add to this polysemy Weber’s idea of classes as unities of social
inequality in discontinuous, uneven social space. Ivan Szelényi’s analysis
of the state socialist new class has never had much to do with Marx’s
antagonistic-political concept of class; it is best described as a Weberian
rereading of Marx’s critique of modernity, applied to the post-Stalinist
status quo in state socialist Central Europe. In terms of that interpretation,
it is difficult to claim—as I think Burawoy does—that Szelényi has moved
away from a class-based interpretation of “Central and East European”
reality. Some passages in Eyal et al.’s treatment of the contemporary
relevance of Stand and Klasse offer an explicit, complex argument re-
garding the mutual embeddedness of the two.

David Stark has indeed moved from an initial interest in the com-
plexities of industrial relations in Hungary to disentangling the transfor-
mations of bundles of property. The idea that conceptual work on the
All Cases Are Linked

Much of the scholarship on the post-state-socialist transformation has a
tendency of underestimating the impact of external effects. Foreign pat-
terns exert an effect through the media, foreign education of the political,
economic, and cultural elites as well as through the wide travel experience
of all European populations (e.g., Hungary annually receives four times
more foreign visitors than its population). International tourism is a widely
neglected factor of social change through informalization, the introduction
of sizable incomes in hard currency, and the creation of extreme consumer
expectations (Bérécz 1996).

The relative advantages and disadvantages of privatization policies in
the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Russia, Slovakia, and what was
formerly East Germany have been widely compared in public discourse
and entered into subsequent policy choices and modifications in each of
those countries. Since 1989, political discourse has commonly made ref-
erence to highly idealized standards of behavior and the institutional
legacies of specific West European societies.'®

Probably the single most momentous force in determining the course
of large-scale social change in Central Europe comes from the European
Union. The EU is currently considering the applications for accession to
full membership by 10 states of formerly state-socialist Europe, with each
applicant already an associate member of the EU. One of the three criteria
for membership is that the applicant state should, by the time of the
beginning of negotiations for accession, have transposed and implemented
the acquis communautaire—the EU’s community laws and regulations.
This produces a very powerful political, economic, and communicative
dependence (Bérécz 2000b). How this borrowing, transposition, and im-
plementation takes place is a veritable gold mine for comparative soci-
ology (see, e.g., Jacoby 1999). The NATO membership of three of the
region’s societies serves as another, increasingly important avenue of in-
stitutional borrowing and recontextualization.

Because of the significance of recontextualization in institutional
change, it is surprising how little of the rich anthropological literature on
recontextualization and hybridity finds its way into the comparative-his-
The Glocal Is Everywhere

The term “glocal” refers to the idea, widespread in work addressing the
globe as a single entity, that the analytical separation of phenomena of
different scales (i.e., global vs. local) is increasingly untenable. I use it
here as a sensitizing tool to the existence of large-scale processes that
influence the institutional- and individual-level outcomes of social change
on the local level.

With the comparative-historical analysis of social change, time (spe-
cifically, the temporal distance allowed by analysis after the onset of the
transformation for changes to take shape) is of utmost substantive sig-
nificance. Had they not closed their data tables between 1993 (e.g., Eyal
et al. 1998, table 4.13) and 1996 (table 4.15), the foreign direct invest-
ment—dominated, large-scale privatization of state assets at least in some
of the region’s societies (most markedly Hungary where, by now, virtually
all of the state’s alienable assets have been passed on to private, over-
whelmingly foreign, investors)'’ would have made it imperative for
Eyal et al. to conceptualize economic globalization, the region’s
(semi)peripheral position in the world economy, and the significance of
transnational actors as central to determining the outcomes of the trans-
formation—all the more so given the precipitous drops in the post-state-
socialist economies’ shares in global product, along with the widening
discrepancies between their GDP and GNP figures caused by the dramatic
increase in the relative significance of foreign-owned companies in their
economic output.

Stark and Bruszt’s chapter 2 does address foreign direct investment.
It does so, however, only in passing and as a generic dimension describing
possible privatization strategies derived from the Hungarian debates on
property change. In the discussion of the binary alternative of “markets
versus clan,” as well as in the book’s subsequent treatise on states and
in such sparkling metaphors as deliberativeness in associations, enabling
constraints, and extended accountability, there is little conceptual reflec-
tion on how the most momentous structural force in the transformation
process—the penetration of foreign capital—has worked to enable foreign
capital while disabling local society. Equally missing is acknowledgement
of the fact that in at least some of the region’s societies, the transformation
took place under severe external debt dependence, causing the fiscal crisis
of the post-state-socialist state (e.g., Campbell 1996). This omission is
surprising, given some literature about the curious presence, and in many
ways quite counterintuitive behavior, of the European state socialist econ-
omies in the capitalist world economy (see, e.g., Frank 1977; Chase-Dunn
1982; Gorin 1985; Kennedy and Smith 1989; Bérécz 1992), as well the
significance of foreign actors in the economic transformation after state
socialism under great shortages of domestic economic assets (Bérécz 1992
and 1993).

It is difficult to overestimate the significance of global forces in local
institutional change in Central Europe. The region’s large organizations
of public authority have metamorphosed from being comprador states
(the local state within the state socialist status quo whose legitimacy rests
with the state socialist imperial center, i.e., outside its borders) into auc-
tioneer states that, instead of democratizing access and optimizing control
over the collective property they inherited in a very concentrated form
from their state socialist predecessor, first hand control over to sitting
management and eventually liquidate all public assets entrusted in their
care to private, overwhelmingly foreign, investors at a discount (Bérécz
1999). All this took place under the global ideological aegis of monetarist
neoliberalism and fiscal restriction, pushed by global lenders and their
organizations. In direct challenge to the modernizationist view of the role
of aid and foreign direct investment, informality has been ubiquitous in
the transformation largely because, and not in spite of, the influence of
foreign actors (Holmes 1999; Boérécz 1993, 20000).

Conventional macroanalysis pays little attention to, and has been ill-
equipped to address, local institutional variation, creating a paucity of
work on the integration of the global and the local. With its emphasis on
the local, conventional institutional analysis has a proclivity for pushing
global factors to the background, so little work is done on the effects of
glocality. The experience of European capitalisms after state socialism
presents a very fertile context for exploring the cleavage between the two.
casewise

 

historical 0
Burawoy’s
critique
Eyal, Szelényi & Townsley

Stark & Bruszt

Fic. 2.—Conceptualization of willingness to consider historical, across-case, and glocal
mechanisms.
APV Rt. 2000. Privatizdcids monitor 1999. Allami Privatizdciés és Vagyonkezelé
Részvénytarsasdg. September 24. http://www.apvrt.hu/m5.html

Bodnar, Judit. 2001. Fin-de-Millénaire Budapest: Metamorphoses of Urban Life.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Borécz, Jézsef. 1989. “Mapping the Class Structures of State Socialism in East-Central
Europe.” Research in Social Stratification and Mobility 8:279-309.

. 1992. “Dual Dependency and Property Vacuum: Social Change on the State

Socialist Semiperiphery.” Theory and Society 21:77-104.

1993. “Simulating the Great Transformation: Property Change under

Prolonged Informality in Hungary.” Archives européennes de sociologie /

Europdisches Archiv fiir Soziologie / European Journal of Sociology 34, no. 1 (May):

81-107.

. 1996. Leisure Migration. A Sociological Study on Tourism. Oxford: Pergamon

Press.

 

 

 

 

1997a. “Social Change with Sticky Features and the Failures of

Modernizationism.” Innovation 10 (2): 161-70.

. 1997b. “Stand Reconstructed: Contingent Closure and Institutional Change.”

Sociological Theory 15 (3): 215-48.

1999. “From Comprador State to Auctioneer State: Property Change,

Realignment and Peripherialization in Post-State-Socialist Central Europe.” Chap.

10 in States and Sovereignty in the Global Economy, edited by David A. Smith,

Dorothy Solinger, and Steven Topik. London: Routledge.

. 2000a. “The Fox and the Raven: The European Union and Hungary

Renegotiate the Margins of ‘Europe.’” Comparative Studies in Society and History

42, no. 2 (October): 847-75.

. 2000b. “Informality Rules.” East European Politics and Societies 14 (2):
348-80.

Bozoki, Andras. 2000. “Erzékenység és tiirelem.” Elet és irodalom, 36. September 25.
http://es.fullnet.hu/0036/index.html

Burawoy, Michael, and Katherine Verdery, eds. 1999. Uncertain Transition:
Ethnographies of Change in the Postsocialist World. Lanham, Md.: Rowman &
Littlefield.

Campbell, John. 1996. “An Institutional Analysis of Fiscal Reform in Postcommunist
Europe.” Theory and Society 25 (1): 45-84.

Chase-Dunn, Christopher K., ed. 1982. Socialist States in the World-System. Beverly
Hills, Calif.: Sage.

Cooper, Frederick, and Ann Laura Stoler. 1997. “Between Metropole and Colony:
Rethinking a Research Agenda.” Pp. 1-40 in Tensions of Empire: Colonial Cultures
in a Bourgeois World, edited by Frederick Cooper and Ann Laura Stoler. Berkeley
and Los Angeles: University of California Press.

Diczhazi, Bertalan. N.d. A kiilféldi téke szerepe a privatizdcidban. Szamadas a
talentumr6l. Budapest: Allami Privatizdciés és Vagyonkezelé Részvénytarsasdg és
GJW-CONSULTATIO konzorcium.

Dupcsik, Csaba. 1994. “Korunk hései.” BUKSZ-Budapesti kényvszemle (Nyar):
151-54.

Elias, Norbert. 1987. “The Retreat of Sociologists into the Present.” Theory, Culture
and Society 4:2-3.

Eyal, Gil, Ivan Szelényi, and Eleanor Townsley. 1998. Making Capitalism without
Capitalists: The New Ruling Elites in Eastern Europe. London: Verso Books.

Frank, André Gunder. 1977. “Long Live Transideological Enterprise! The Socialist
Economies in the Capitalist International Division of Labor.” Review 1, no. 1
(Summer): 91-140.

Gorin, Zeev. 1985. “Socialist Societies and World System Theory: A Critical Survey.”
Nature and Society 49, no. 3 (Fall): 332-66.
Halamai, Gabor. 1996-97. “Free Speech in the New Hungarian Constitutional
Practice.” International Journal of Sociology 26 (4): 66-75.

Hillman, Arye L. 1994. “The Transition from Socialism: An Overview from a Political
Economy Perspective.” European Journal of Political Economy 10, no. 1 (May):
191-225.

Holmes, Stephen. 1999. “Can Foreign Aid Promote the Rule of Law? Drawing Lessons
from Failures in Legal Reform.” East European Constitutional Review 8, no. 4 (Fall):
68-74.

Jacoby, Wade. 1999. “Priest and Pentitent: The European Union as a Force in the
Domestic Politics of Eastern Europe.” East European Constitutional Review 8, no.
1/2 (Winter/Spring): 62-67.

Kennedy, Michael D., and David A. Smith. 1989. “East Central European
Urbanization: A Political Economy of the World-System Perspective.” International
Journal of Urban and Regional Research 13, no. 4 (December): 597-624.

Konrad, George, and Ivan Szelényi. 1974. The Intellectuals on the Road to Class Power.
Translated from the Hungarian by Andrew Arato and Richard E. Allen. New York:
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

Kontler, Laszl6. 1999. “Central Europe: Ten Years After.” European Review of History
6, no. 1 (Spring): 9-14.

Kornai, Janos. 1992. The Socialist System: The Political Economy of Communism.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Manza, Jeff. 1992. “Classes, Status Groups, and Social Closure: A Critique of Neo-
Weberian Social Theory.” Current Perspectives in Social Theory 12:275-302.

Murphy, Raymond. 1988. Social Closure: The Theory of Monopolization and Exclusion.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Parkin, Frank. 1974. “Strategies of Social Closure in Class Formation.” Pp. 1-18. in
The Social Analysis of Class Structure, edited by Frank Parkin. London: Tavistock.

Portes, Alejandro. 1998. “Social Capital: Its Origins and Applications in Modern
Sociology.” Annual Reviews of Sociology 24:1-24.

Portes, Alejandro, and Patricia Landolt. 2000. “Social Capital: Promise and Pitfalls of
Its Role in Development.” Journal of Latin American Studies 32:529-47.

Rona-Tas, Akos. 1994. “The First Shall Be Last? Entrepreneurship and Communist
Cadres in the Transition from Socialism.” American Journal of Sociology 100 (1):
40-69.

. 1997. The Great Surprise of the Small Transformation: The Demise of

Communism and the Rise of the Private Sector in Hungary. Ann Arbor: University

of Michigan Press.

. 1998. “Path Dependence and Capital Theory: Sociology of the Post-Communist
Economic Transformation.” East European Politics and Societies 12 (1): 107-31.

Said, Edward. 1978. Orientalism. New York: Vintage.

. 1992. “Path Dependence and Privatization Strategies in East Central Europe.”

East European Politics and Societies 6, no. 1 Winter): 17-54.

. 1996. “Recombinant Property in East European Capitalism.” American Journal
of Sociology 101, no. 4 (January): 993-1027.

Stark, David, and Laszl6 Bruszt. 1998. Postsocialist Pathways: Transforming Politics
and Property in East Central Europe. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Szelényi, Ivan. 1986-87. “The Prospects and Limits of the East European New Class
Project: An Auto-Critical Reflection on ‘The Intellectuals on the Road to Class
Power.’” Politics and Society 15 (2): 103-44.

U.S. Department of State. 2000. Background Notes: Hungary. September 24. http://
www.state.gov/www/background_notes/hungary_9908_bgn.html

Vedres, Balazs. 2000. “A tulajdonosi halézatok felbomldsa: A rekombindns
tulajdonformak szerepe és a hazai nagyvallalatok tulajdonszerkezetének jellemzéi
a kilencvenes évek végén.” _ http://www.bke.hu’vedres/pges/Papers/Tul2000/

Tulajdon2000.htm. February.
Wallerstein, Immanuel. 1974. The Modern World-System: Capitalist Agriculture and

the Origins of the European world-Economy in the sixteenth Century. New York:
Academic Press.
Weber, Max. (1920) 1978. Economy and Society: An Outline of Interpretive Sociology.
Edited by Giinther Roth and Claus Wittich. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Wolff, Larry. 1994. Inventing Eastern Europe: The Map of Civilization on the Mind
of the Enlightenment. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press.
