Marriage, Women, and Social Stratification: A Theoretical Critique

Author(s): Max Haller

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 86, No. 4 (Jan., 1981), pp. 766-795
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2778342

Accessed: 08-06-2016 03:33 UTC
In recent years, sociological research has been concerned increasingly
with patterns of intergenerational and marital mobility of women,
patterns of marital homogamy, and consequences of marital heter-
ogamy. This research can make further substantial contributions
only if it becomes integrated into a more adequate theoretical frame-
work. In the first part of the paper, elements of such a framework
are developed. Social stratification is conceived of as a process of
differential association emerging as a complement to that of class
formation in order to develop and preserve collective social identity
within a world characterized by pervasive economic inequality. The
outcome of this process is a long-term macrosocial reproduction of
inequality when it penetrates two strategic forms of social relations,
parent-child and husband-wife relationships. The second part of the
paper applies this theoretical approach to the marital relationship
by discussing traditional and alternative hypotheses about stratifica-
tion mechanisms within the decision to marry, patterns of marital
homogamy, and consequences of marital heterogamy. The new frame-
work avoids some problematic assumptions of the dominant tradition
of research and is able to provide a more adequate explanation for
many empirical findings.
ELEMENTS OF A THEORY OF SOCIAL STRATIFICATION

In order to analyze the role of marriage and family in the process of
stratification, it is first of all necessary to elaborate the concept of stratifi-
cation. Many observers have noted that the frequent use of the concept
of social status stands in contradiction to a lack of theoretical clarity (Rose
1958; Burchard 1960; Coleman 1966; Cicourel 1970; Lasswell and Ben-
brooke 1974; Otto 1975). In this paper, I argue that we should distinguish
between two types of mechanisms whereby social inequality is generated
and transformed through time, namely, social stratification and class for-
mation. This conceptual distinction, well-known in classical German so-
ciology (Tonnies 1966; Weber 1968), has been taken up again recently
by several authors (Martindale 1972; Bendix 1974; Krauss 1976; Hechter
1978). Its relevance is documented by the fact that many studies of social
stratification (Pfautz and Duncan 1950; Coleman 1966; Blau and Duncan
1967; Lasswell and Benbrooke 1974) and class formation and conflict
(Dahrendorf 1959) seem to presuppose it. In this part of the paper, there-
fore, I attempt to (1) elaborate a concept of social stratification, (2)
show how social stratification is linked to structures of social inequality
and class, and (3) demonstrate that the parent-child and the husband-wife
relationships are the central features of social stratification.
(1968) and other scholars in his tradition attributed to this notion, they
did not elaborate a theory of social honor (Parkin 1971, p. 33). If we are
to develop such a theory we are faced with at least three questions: What
are the social functions of the differential distribution of honor? What
are the bases for granting honor to persons and collectivities? In what
kinds of social action is social honor realized? The first of these three
questions will be dealt with in this, the second and third in the subsequent
two, sections.

What are the social functions of the differential distribution of honor?
My first argument is that these functions are related primarily to social
interaction—a relationship largely neglected up to now (Cicourel 1970,
p. 13). If we want to understand the functions of the differential distribu-
tion of social honor in society, we have to look at the characteristic fea-
tures of social interaction. Two theoretical approaches to the study of
social interaction may be distinguished: the theory of the “socialized
actor” and that of “social identity” (Cancian 1975). They suggest two
different points of departure for the analysis of social stratification in
terms of interaction. In the social identity approach, which I follow here,
the peculiar character of social interaction is seen in the fact that human
beings interpret and define each other’s actions. The key feature is that
a human being is thought of as having a self or an identity, which implies
that he can be the object of his own actions (Blumer 1962). It is assumed,
in this approach, that individuals are motivated to maintain particular
identities. Social norms are collective beliefs about what actions will cause
others to validate a particular identity. Here, conformity to norms is es-
sentially a mechanism for validating one’s identity, that is, an instrumental
mechanism and not a mechanism adapting individuals to a coherent, com-
mon value system (Cancian 1975, pp. 137-39). In this framework, it is
obvious to connect the mechanism of social stratification with interaction
processes and, in particular, with forms of intimate social interaction. From
this point of view, we can agree with Shils (1962, p. 767), who writes
that face-to-face relationships are of particular significance in the stratifi-
cation system and that individuals can perceive their own status in the
judgment of others only within such relationships.

However, social stratification would hardly become a fundamental and
durable social process if it operated only in the transitory encounters of
everyday life. In fact, the participants in such encounters try continually
to establish control over these processes of interaction by restricting them
to certain categories of persons, that is, by establishing social boundaries.
These boundaries have the twin functions of preventing “unequal” people
from entering one’s own sphere and restricting one’s own interaction possi-
bilities to “equals.” Social boundaries, thus, exclude others, but they also
create and preserve identity. In this way, social distance between individ-
uals and collectivities emerges. Social distance as understood within such
an interaction framework (see McFarland and Brown 1973) thus defines
those persons as distant from or near to each other who avoid or maintain
a variety of intimate and close personal relationships (van den Berghe
1960; Banton 1960; Ingham 1970; Schmitt 1972; Lopata 1973). Through
such forms of “distancing” or “social closure,” the highly discontinuous
and intermittent character of deference behavior and status symbols (see
Goffman 1951, 1959; Shils 1969) is transformed into persistent social
structures.

These considerations lead to a view of social stratification as a mecha-
nism establishing boundaries on social interaction. Social distance emerges
between acting units with different degrees of participation in, or posses-
sion of, social goods (Krauss 1976) insofar as these goods or “macrosocial
properties” (Shils 1969) are the basis for the formation of interaction
patterns and identity. Social distance is thus seen as emerging because
particular groups have distinct life experiences and develop specific views
of themselves and their society. A common position in the macrosocial
structure of inequality leads to the development of similar identities among
the members of a group who are characterized by close interaction indi-
cating that they consider each other equals. From this point of view, the
formation of social strata is in a certain way a “microsocial” phenomenon.
In its self-constitution, a deference stratum is concerned primarily with
the boundary lines it draws about itself and less with those defining other
social strata (Shils 1969, p. 338; Coleman and Neugarten 1971, p. 264).

A more or less coherent deference system develops and is accepted
throughout a society because there is only a restricted amount of social
wealth or social goods and because, in general, the higher the stratum
the greater the share in most of those goods. The structure of the distribu-
tion of these goods and their relation to social interaction touches the
second issue to be discussed here, namely, that of the mechanisms leading
toward social inequality.
cupational positions. In this approach, occupational positions, not individ-
ual persons, are the units of evaluation. This idea is incompatible with the
assumption of the social identity approach that acting individuals or col-
lectivities are the main units in deference behavior.

The question to be concerned with here is how to conceptualize (1) the
relevance of these “macrosocial properties” for stratification processes, (2)
the internal structure of these properties, and (3) the social forces de-
termining the emergence, stabilization, and modification of these structures.
Up to now, I have referred rather loosely to macrosocial properties as the
bases for social stratification. The question is, however, how the internal
structure and the relative importance of these properties can be grasped
theoretically. This leads us to the second issue raised above, namely, the
causes of the emergent structures of social inequality. What is necessary
here is to specify the particular function of social stratification within
the totality of the processes contributing to the long-term reproduction
of social inequality. To do so, it is necessary to introduce another concept,
that of social class or class formation. In order to clarify the relation of
this concept to that of stratification, two levels of analysis may be dis-
tinguished, namely, the distributive and the relational levels. The first
tells us how different “social goods” (Krauss 1976, pp. 9-10) are dis-
tributed among the members of a society. All those scarce products of
human work which people strive for can be considered such goods. The
reproduction of social inequality in the sense of the social production and
distribution of these goods, however, can be understood only by reference
to the second level of analysis, that of social relations. It is through the
processes of class formation and social stratification that social inequality
as a distributive feature is maintained and transformed through time. The
central characteristics of the two processes may be summarized as follows
(see also table 1).

Class formation and conflict have their roots in the economic sphere
because they concern the forms whereby scarce socioeconomic goods are
produced and distributed among social groups and sectors. As such, they
involve not only the immediate spheres of production and distribution—
enterprises, firms, and markets—but also the whole range of social and
political institutions created in order to ensure the functioning of the
economy and to strengthen the relative bargaining power of the interested
parties. A central feature of class formation is the degree to which the
collective groupings located within specific positions in the relations of
production and distribution become aware of particular interests which
are “strategic” insofar as they are contrary to those of an opposite class.
Today, in most advanced industrial, capitalist societies, the typical form
of interaction between classes can be characterized as “antagonistic co-
operation” insofar as it is based on acceptance of the existing socioeco-
nomic order (Montague 1956).

It is easy to see how the particular features of social stratification differ
from those of class formation. The latter aim deliberately at the monopoli-
zation and exploitation of scarce societal resources (e.g., capital, skills, and
labor power). These aims are attained through the creation of economic
and political organizations (e.g., firms, crafts and professions, employer
organizations and unions). Social stratification, in contrast, relates to the
interests and aims of persons and families as individual actors. Only in
particular instances and in a mediate way can their concern with access
to societal positions and resources be furthered by the development of
organizational means (e.g., schools, associations). In general, social strata
are not able to develop anything comparable to “class capacities” (Wright
1978; see also Krauss 1967, p. 135).?

From a certain point of view it can be said that the relationship of
individual persons and families to societal structures of inequality is of
a reactive nature. Since the essential feature of social stratification is the
limitation of close, personal interaction (and sympathetic feelings) to
others located in similar positions and the restriction of interaction with
“others” to role-specific utilitarian matters (such as that between profes-
sionals and clients), social strata cannot become more than loosely bound
“communities” or “aggregates” (Martindale 1972, p. 272; Krauss 1976,
p. 16). But even so, social stratification has to be considered an essential
mechanism contributing to the long-term reproduction of social inequality
when it penetrates into the most fundamental types of social relationships.
It follows that the processes of class formation and stratification must
constitute the starting point for the analysis of social inequality from a
theoretical point of view. Existing structures of social inequality as dis-
tributive features—amount and distribution of wealth, skills, and knowl-
edge and number and types of occupational opportunities, positions, and
so forth—are doubtless of crucial importance in the relationship between
class formation and social stratification. It seems misleading, however,
to look for some set of “fundamental dimensions” of inequality (e.g.,
Lenski 1954; Runciman 1968) because these dimensions themselves are
contingent on processes of class conflict and social stratification. This is
evident in the case of class formation, which hinges on conflicts about
the ways in which societal production and distribution are organized. But
structures of social inequality are contingent on social stratification, too,
even if in a more mediate way. Here, the uncoordinated pursuit of interests
by millions of individuals and families constitutes a latent but nonetheless
strong force maintaining old barriers and boundaries even when funda-
mental changes occur in the distributive aspects of social inequality (see
Boudon [1974] and Bowles and Gintis [1976] for the effects of this process
of “pluralistic adjustment” on the development of educational opportuni-
ties). It is justified, therefore, to claim that the descriptive analysis of
dimensions of social inequality constitutes an important research domain
(see Stone and Form 1953; Ellis 1958; Duncan 1968; Blau 1974; Pappi
1976). It is evident, however, that a theory explaining the emergence and
maintenance of social inequality encompasses more than this descriptive
level of analysis, which grasps only the outcome of class formation and
social stratification at certain times.

Two final points should be made concerning the relationship between
class formation and social stratification. First, I would like to stress once
more the complex and mutual character of that relationship. At the level
of economic and political transactions, class formation has to be consid-
ered the moving power for changes in the distributive features of social
inequality and, subsequently, for stratification, too. Recognition of this
fact helps to avoid interpreting social inequality as an immutable feature
of human society® or falling back on individualistic or functionalistic
explanations of social inequality, as is done even by such authors as
Schumpeter (1951, p. 150) or Weber (see Hechter 1976). It helps to
understand why certain social goods become valued more than others
and, consequently, a societal value hierarchy emerges, conferring “charis-
ma” on incumbents of its center (Shils 1969; Eisenstadt 1970). The
reason is that the creators and the holders of organizations and occupa-
tions in this center have monopolized important, powerful, and prestigious
social activities and rewards. The development of such a value hierarchy
and center is, therefore, mainly a consequence of the development of a
corresponding power center (see also Tausky 1965). At another level, social
stratification has significant effects on class formation. Through the process
of strata-specific “pluralistic adjustment,” aims and strategies of class
organizations as well as the development of class consciousness may be
thwarted but their accomplishment may also be facilitated. The first hap-
pens when social boundaries are created between people belonging to sim-
ilar positions in the relations of production. The second takes place when
activities and interests based on class criteria overlap social boundaries
based on status-related criteria (e.g., ethnic membership; see Gedicks
1977). Thus, both class formation and social stratification must be con-
ceptualized as concrete historical phenomena distinguishable by different
contexts, actors, and temporal structures.® Therefore, it can be said that
in a certain sense class-related mechanisms are those that generate social
inequality, while status-group formation serves as a protective device
against class-based inequalities. From this point of view, corporate status-
group consciousness helps people in underprivileged positions to develop
stable social identities. But this “reactive” character of social stratification
for underprivileged social groups becomes an active strategy with members
of middle and higher strata. Status-group formation as “social closure”
here becomes a powerful force, creating and preserving social inequality
in its own right (see also Parkin 1974). The persistent tendency of strati-
fication mechanisms toward the formation of at least three distinct strata
and, thus, some “middle layers” undermining the pure dichotomy of class
society (Wallerstein 1975) confirms the complex intertwining of the two
processes.

The second point concerns the role of conflict versus integration within
the mechanisms of class formation and social stratification. Here I would
like to stress that it is impossible simply to see class formation as a process
of conflict and social stratification as one of integration.” It is true that
social stratification, through the generation of social distance, helps to
conceal effectively in everyday life the objective amount of inequality
and thereby functions as a primary integrating mechanism. But in West-
ern “consociational democracies” many aspects of class relations, too, seem
to have the function of obscuring divergent interests more than that of
bringing them to the public consciousness. On the other hand, it would
be misleading to overlook the fact that to a large degree social stratifica-
tion, like class differences, involves aspects of conflict, violence, and ex-
ploitation. This fact has been elaborated convincingly by W. P. Archibald
(1976). He argues that class, status, and power differences are threaten-
ing, and, therefore, encounters between members of different class and
status groups tend (1) to be avoided as far as possible, (2) to take place
on a narrow, role-specific rather than on a personal basis, (3) to be initiated
and controlled by those with more power, and (4) to contain a high degree
of latent hostility (see also Collins 1971). But even if these formal sim-
It is one of the central arguments of this paper that a concept of social
stratification based on interaction must pay explicit attention to the specific
types of interaction under study. This point, which has rarely been rec-
ognized (e.g., Banton 1960; Ingham 1970), has important methodological
implications. Each single case of social interaction is determined simul-
taneously by characteristics of the interacting units and by properties of
the social system in which the interaction occurs (Scheiblechner 1971).
In this critique, the position of a person in the structure of social inequality
is a relevant trait of the interacting unit. The particular type of interaction
involved, however, represents a system property which has to be taken
into account from the theoretical viewpoint just as do the characteristics
of the interacting unit.® A related problem is that of the units in these
interactions and relationships. In this section, I argue that (1) marriage
has to be considered one of the two fundamental stratification relation-
ships, (2) an accurate understanding of this relationship requires a focus
on the acting units, and (3) these two arguments are consistent with the
thesis that the family is the fundamental unit of social stratification. I
am thus dealing with the third question to be answered by a theory of
stratification.

O. D. Duncan (1968, pp. 683-85) considers assortative mating “a

special instance of differential association” which should best be regarded
8 In fact, it may be possible to ground the theory of social inequality on a theory of
social action in the following way. Starting from a distinction between the substantive
and the relational dimensions of social action, one could see—following Habermas
(1968) and Kreckel (1976)—work and interaction as the two essential substantive
types of social action, and—following Weber (1968), Goldhamer and Shils (1969), and
Kemper (1973)—power and status as the two relational types of action. The last two
forms coordinate the actions of individuals: power enforces compliance through the
orders of one actor to the other, status causes one actor to grant it voluntarily to the
other. Work and interaction, power and status then can be thought of as forming a
two-dimensional space with four types of social action, two of which are of particular
importance in social reality. That is, power becomes the predominant form of inducing
compliance within work settings and status within social interaction, thereby estab-
lishing the twin processes of class formation and social stratification. For reasons of
space, it is not possible to elaborate this idea and its limitations here (see also Strasser
1976).
9 The importance of this point seems not to have been adequately recognized in studies
which have analyzed particular types of interaction, such as friendship patterns, as
“best” indicators of social distance between strata (Laumann 1966; Pappi 1973; Reu-
band 1974).
as a condition influencing the intergenerational transmission of status.
Other sociologists have put more emphasis on the marital relationship as
a central feature of the stratification process. Weber (1968), Schumpeter
(1951), and Wrong (1972) regarded frequent intermarriage as the most
important characteristic of typical class behavior. Barber (1957, p. 123)
notes that “the social consequences of courtship and marriage are more
far-reaching than those of the other forms of intimacy.” In most of the
social distance scales which aim at representing the distance between per-
sons, the marital relationship stands for the most intimate relationship
(Beshers 1963; Laumann 1973).

The assumption that the marital relationship looms large in the process
of stratification has not been satisfactorily substantiated in these studies
from a theoretical point of view. An implicit answer has been given within
the Warner approach to stratification, which sees marital homogamy and
intergenerational status transmission as the central features of a “class
society” (Coleman and Neugarten 1971, p. 5). This approach maintains
that the persistence of family status over several generations requires “an
equivalence of place not only for the marrying pair of one generation but
for many generations which succeed each other” (Warner and Lunt 1941,
p. 93).

From such a point of view, assortative mating has to be considered the
necessary complement to intergenerational status transmission. If the choice
of marriage partners occurred largely at random, such a phenomenon as
“family status” could hardly emerge. The absence of homogamy seems
to have been one of the most important reasons why, for instance, African
societies did not tend to develop relatively enduring, culturally distinct
social strata. The explanation is that “given the practice of heterogamy
(or open connubium), it is clearly difficult to maintain or institutionalize
class differences, that is, internal differences of culture distinct from those
based on expenditures alone” (Goody 1971, p. 590). Homogamy must
therefore be considered as a necessary condition for the development of
family life-styles varying from one stratum to another. Students of mar-
riage have long been aware that marriage patterns have important im-
plications for the persistence of social structure because they constitute
a primary segregating as well as an interlinking mechanism (Slater 1963;
Talmon 1964; Fallers 1966; Leach 1970; Hazelrigg and Lopreato 1972).
Homogamy can therefore rightly be considered ‘‘a mechanism to maintain
the status quo” (Eckland 1968, p. 78) and marrying out an important
“equalizing mechanism” (Talmon 1964, p. 497).

But why should the process of mate selection tend toward a pattern
of homogamy in modern industrialized societies, of which it is said that
“the tendency to marry for love may tend to equalize the status attain-
ments of females from the different social levels” (Glenn et al. 19748, p.
685)? The most common explanation of the persistence of patterns of
homogamy in such societies, which lack strong and open forms of institu-
tional control over mate selection, is that parents and peer groups still
exercise such control, though more informally (Barber 1957, p. 126; Goode
1970, p. 156). This explanation based on social control, although it no
doubt contains some truth, is not wholly satisfying from the point of view
proposed here.

A social relationship is understood here as a relationship involving each
participant as a “personal entity,” that is, as a distinct individual known
to the reference person from prior interactions (McCall and Simmons
1966, p. 169). Like any other social relationship, the marital relationship
has to be considered part of the process of identity formation, which is
influenced fundamentally by the macrosocial properties of both partners
(Berger and Kellner 1970; Lopata 1973). By and large, young people
who have enjoyed similar childhood and youth experiences and developed
similar identities and outlooks will find opportunities for “falling in love”
with each other. By creating interaction boundaries, social stratification
restricts the pool of eligibles to those with a similar position in the system
of social inequality. According to this view, structural constraints and
individual choice are not mutually exclusive but interlocking aspects of
the mate-selection process.

Within such a framework, one controversial issue in stratification theory
can be resolved more satisfactorily, that is, the nature of the unit in social
stratification. Is the notion that individual persons are the units in the
marital relationship consistent with the contention that the family is the
unit of social stratification? From the viewpoint of symbolic interaction
theory, social actors are considered the units in interactions and relation-
ships. These actors, however, need not be individual persons; they can
also be collectivities insofar as the members cooperate in solving common
problems (Blumer 1962, p. 187; McCall and Simmons 1966, p. 175). In
this sense, the relationship between a man and a woman can be considered
a collective unit. The question is, then, In which cases and under what
conditions can we expect a marital pair to represent such an acting unit?

As Simmel (1923, pp. 61-63) noted, two-person relationships in general
hardly develop a sense of unity or objective reality. This is valid especially
for love relationships, which are typically characterized by some feeling
of “uniqueness.” Two characteristics, however, tend to provide the marital
relationship with a certain sense of objectivity (Simmel 1923, p. 61): its
close and intimate character, and the existence of laws governing the
forms of contraction and dissolution of marriage and the rights and
obligations of the partners. A further element enters in when a couple
is establishing a household. This element comprises access to common
artifacts of living and the multiplicity of activities engaged in together
over long periods of time. Both of these operate to strengthen the sense
of unity of the couple in a fundamental way. Sentiments and activities,
laws and possessions together introduce an element of ascription into the
relationship, thus contributing to its consolidation and objectification (Mc-
Call and Simmons 1966, p. 174). Only to the degree that these sets of
forces are effective can we think of the marital pair as becoming a “social
unit.”2° On no account, therefore, are a husband and wife to be accorded
automatically the same social status from their wedding day onward. Only
to the degree that they act together on common tasks or stick together
against outsiders “to maintain proper fronts” (McCall and Simmons 1966,
p. 176) can they be regarded as a. unit.1!

From this point of view, the model of the nuclear family and its place
in the stratification system as developed by functionalist stratification the-
ory (Parsons [1953] 1966, [1940] 1954a,; Barber 1957) seems highly ques-
tionable. Three assumptions of this model are relevant here: (1) individ-
uals derive their status from their families, (2) the family derives its
status from the male head of the household, and (3) the status of women
is derived from that of their husbands (see Watson and Barth 1964;
Acker 1973). Recent critics of these assumptions have argued that they
are no longer tenable because increasingly large numbers of married
women are working and because in many of these marriages the educa-
tional and occupational level of the wives exceeds that of their husbands
(Barth and Watson 1967; Haug 1973). Generalizing this critique, C.
Safilios-Rothschild (1975) has hypothesized that not only can work-
ing wives “enjoy two status lines’—one achieved by their own occupation
and one derived from their husband—but that this may be true for their
husbands as well.
The arguments of these critics are sound but they do not go far enough
to be of theoretical significance. Indeed, the critics themselves have not
abandoned one of the basic propositions of the functionalist approach,
namely, that social status is gained only through a full-time occupational
role. It is evident, however, that this assumption is incompatible with
the theoretical point of view proposed here, which conceives of occupation
as only one among a series of dimensions of social inequality. It is at odds,
too, with empirical findings, which show that the status of the wife has
an important impact on family life and on the future of children even if,
for example, the wife has a lower educational or occupational position
than her husband or does not work at all (see Warner and Lunt 1941,
p. 90; Krauss 1967; Barth and Watson 1967; Kohn 1969; Coleman and
Neugarten 1971, pp. 71-79, 247-48; Jennings and Niemi 1971; Szinovacz
1973; Ridge 1974). Neglect of this fact is related to one further ques-
tionable assumption within the functionalist approach. When functionalists
speak of the family as the fundamental unit of stratification, they are
referring only to the nuclear family. But if we are to understand the
relations between family and stratification, we must consider not only
one marrying pair and its children but a sequence of marital and familial
units (Warner and Lunt 1941, p. 93; Schumpeter 1951, p. 177). The
reason that the phenomenon of “social inheritance” encompasses more
than two generations does not lie, however, in the peculiar character of
marriage and family relationships. The reason is that families living in
a world characterized by pervasive social inequalities develop strong in-
terests in preserving a privileged position once they have acquired it.”
Miiller 1975). In doing so, one should record not only the presence or
absence of a relationship but also its frequency, degree of regularity, in-
tensity, content, and any other related and relevant characteristics (see
McCall and Simmons 1966; Scheiblechner 1971). It is the main thesis of
this paper that the unique features of the marital relationship confer on
it a particular importance vis-a-vis most other types of social interaction
and relationship. Here I will try only to delineate some specific features
of the marital relationship insofar as they are relevant to the process of
social stratification.

We may start with the premise that every relationship can be conceived
of as having a career and in its course may become quite different from
that initially intended (McCall and Simmons 1966, pp. 167-201). In
general, every relationship contains a “strain toward totality” by includ-
ing progressively larger segments of one’s identity and greater amounts of
one’s time and resources. Thus, it tends to change from a personal at-
tachment to a commitment and at times to an ascription. In some in-
stances, the elements of ascription may eventually outweigh the initial
attachment, and the relationship may lose part of its rewarding character
for one or both of the parties involved.

In the following discussion, I will concentrate on three aspects of the
development of the marital relationship which are of particular importance
here: the decision to marry, patterns of marital homogamy, and conse-
quences of marital heterogamy. I have selected these three themes because
they have been either relatively neglected in related discussions or treated
rather one-sidedly and therefore offer the possibility of demonstrating the
explanatory power of the present approach in contrast to the dominant
tradition.
cerns the patterns of marital and familial life as they have been exhibited
by the parents of both partners. Not only the form and quality of their
conjugal life as such but also intra- and extrafamilial division of labor
have an impact on the younger generation’s images and expectations. And
it is evident that many of the features of those styles of life—cooperation
of the parents in a family enterprise, employment of the mother, experi-
ences of separation or divorce, etc.—vary according to societal position.
A second set of influences is related to educational and occupational ex-
periences. Attending school through the period of adolescence not only
imparts knowledge but also allows a kind of privileged, “prolonged so-
cialization” (Rosenmayr, Kreutz, and Kéckeis 1966). The same is true
for the occupational career, which is all the more central and significant
a part of life experience the more highly qualified a person is and the
more steadily he advances in his career. Such aspects of work and career
as the degree of work commitment (Haller and Rosenmayr 1971) or oc-
cupational self-direction (Kohn 1969) have a fundamental impact on
personal identity formation. Both education and occupation, therefore,
through their impact on identity formation, have significant effects on the
meaning of the marital relationship for the persons involved (see also
Lopata 1973).

A second, related, element in the decision whether to marry or not re-
gards the resources of the persons involved. From this point of view, edu-
cation and occupation constitute strategic assets providing the base for a
stable income and livelihood as well as enabling the development of
cultural interests and a distinctive “style of life’ (Shils 1969, p. 309;
Scanzoni 1970). The relevance of this element to the decision to marry
can be demonstrated particularly in regard to property as a source of
income. Analyses of characteristics of people relying on marriage advertise-
ments (Mertesdorf 1967; Haller 1980) and of marital pairs adopting
children (Donati and Nicoletti 1974) show clearly that marriage here is
seen to a large degree as a “status symbol” (Goffman 1951) and/or a
means of acquiring heirs and transmitting property.

A third element in the decision to marry is the mate-selection process
itself and its interplay with other experiences and turning points through-
out the cycle of life. From this point of view, education and occupation
are important insofar as they structure one’s life course, especially during
youth and young adulthood—the period when mate selection takes place.
One obvious aspect relevant here is the availability of a spouse with a
similar educational and occupational level, that is, the immediate struc-
tural determinants of the patterns of homogamy. The hierarchically strati-
fied systems of education as they exist in many advanced industrial so-
cieties sort young people into physically separate groupings just at the
time when they are dating and marrying (Garrison, Anderson, and Reed
1968, p. 116). In view of the cultural and institutional constraints ascrib-
ing to the husband the “economic provider role” for the family (Parsons
[1942] 19545; Grenseth 1970), the availability of an “adequate” spouse
doubtless plays different roles for men and for women. As long as the
status conferred on the family by the public is more contingent on the
husband’s status (see Rossi et al. 1974), it is not really surprising that
women are more prone than men to remain single when they cannot marry
someone of at least equal standing (see Coleman and Neugarten 1971, p.
248).

Thus, a variety of forces related to the position of men and women in
the macrosocial structures of social inequality affect the decision to marry.
Aspirations and experiences, successes and failures within the educational
and occupational career are particularly relevant to aspirations and ex-
pectations about the marital partnership. Empirical research has shown
that early school leaving and poor occupational prospects often lead to
an ill-considered marriage, sometimes also in connection with an un-
planned pregnancy (Elder 1969; Haller 19735). On the other hand, suc-
cessful graduation from an educational institution as well as good occupa-
tional prospects will certainly reduce the need for relying on marriage as
an evasion. All in all, it is not surprising that the net effect of educational
and occupational experiences turns out to be that unmarried females are
concentrated in the higher social strata, while the reverse is true for men
(see Carter and Glick 1970, p. 685; Findl 1978). For better educated
women, most of the processes mentioned here reduce the need for relying
on marriage as an “institution of maintenance” and at the same time in-
crease expectations about a marital partnership. Hence neither “spinster-
hood as choice” nor “marital rejects” seems an appropriate label for the
complex interplay between structural constraints and personal experiences
and aspirations in a woman’s decision not to marry (see also Havens 1973).
status of the spouses’ parents as indicators for patterns of marital homog-
amy was stated, for instance, by Rubin (1968, p. 752) as follows: “It
seems clear that the jobs held by young women before marriage do not
provide reliable indicators of their social status.”” This assumption seems
to pervade much of the literature on this topic (see Laumann 1966, p.
76; Eckland 1968, p. 80; Parkin 1971, p. 15; Mayer 1977, p. 172; one
rare exception is Oldman and IlIsley [1966]). Upon closer examination,
however, it does not stand firm. Glenn et al. (19742, p. 684) have rightly
criticized Rubin’s study because it “relates the origins of women to the
origins of their husbands and does not deal with the adult status of the
husbands. To illustrate, by the Rubin procedure, an insurance salesman’s
daughter married to a physician whose father was a craftsman is classified
as downwardly mobile.” Doubtless there exist substantiated sociological
arguments for regarding social origins of husband and wife as significant
determinants of their marriage patterns. But considered from such a point
of view, marital heterogamy is a multidimensional phenomenon in a three-
fold way: (1) within the parental generation, (2) between husband and
wife, and (3) between these two generations. It is evident that the con-
sideration of only one of these units must confound these different effects.
This point has been clearly recognized by J. M. Ridge (1974, p. 47), who
notes that the adequacy of a view of the family as a social context com-
posed of individual members can be established only by including the
“emergent properties” of the family as a system together with the indi-
vidual attributes of its members. It has to be noted in this regard, more-
over, that the frequent assumption that women’s own occupation is a poor
indicator of their status does not correspond to reality. Most of the sys-
tematic comparisons to date between patterns of intergenerational status
of men and women have concluded that they do not diverge substantially
(see DeJong, Brawer, and Robin 1971; Felson and Knoke 1974; Treiman
and Terrell 1975; Featherman and Hauser 1976; McClendon 1976). Even
though this generalization has been attacked recently on plausible grounds
(Sgrensen 1979), it is a fact that male and female educational and occupa-
tional status distributions do not diverge substantially (even though they
are concentrated in different occupations and industrial sectors). From
this point of view, it is hardly an improvement to compare the occupa-
tional status of wife’s father with that of her husband (see Glenn, Ross,
and Tully 19746; Mayer 1977).

A somewhat different justification for not considering the marital rela-
tionship one of the two fundamental “stratification relationships” has been
presented by E. O. Laumann. He argues that friendship patterns may be
more important for maintaining a stratification system because they “serve
to socialize persons into the appropriate attitudes of a given level in the
stratification system” (Laumann 1966, p. 84). It is questionable, however,
whether friendship relations are in fact characterized to a higher degree
than marital dyads by status congruity of the partners,'® and it is, more-
over, unlikely that friendship relations have as long-lasting consequences
as a marital relationship, which involves much more than occasional vol-
untary encounters and activities.

A third line of research does not aim to analyze marital patterns per
se, but asks whether women’s intergenerational mobility through marriage
is similar in extent to men’s (Tyree and Treas 1974; Glenn et al. 19740;
Chase 1975). The theoretical assumption behind this question seems to
be the same as that already criticized above, namely, that the main de-
terminant for the status of a woman is the status of her husband (see
Chase 1975, p. 484). From this point of view, it is logical to ask, not
what determines the status of women themselves, but “what determines
their access to men of different social status” (Pavalko and Nager 1968,
p. 524). But in view of the just mentioned fact that the intergenerational
occupational status attainment processes of men and women do not diverge
very strongly, it is hardly tenable that “most female mobility has been
(and perhaps is) through marriage’ (Glenn et al. 19744, p. 684; one
exception to this assumption is Tyree and Treas [1974]). It is also mis-
leading to draw conclusions about the general pattern of female mobility
by investigating only marital mobility of women (e.g., Chase 1975).

Thus a good deal of existing research on patterns of marital homogamy
is at odds not only with the theory of social stratification advanced here
but also with a social theory according women, be they employed outside
their household or not, a status of their own.
346), for instance. In his study of status inconsistency and stress in mar-
riage, he states that “the status a wife initially brings to marriage is likely
to be as important to her husband as his is to her.” But this statement
seems to be only lip service: the author goes on to say that an interest
“Gn the effects of hypergamy and hypogamy on men no less than on women
[is] best served by comparing spouses’ backgrounds.” For this neglect
of women’s own status attributes, Pearlin has been criticized by Weiser
and Magnani (1976). In their own study, however, these authors seem
to accord a status of their own only to those women who are active mem-
bers of the labor force.

Apart from this problem, already dealt with in the preceding section,
the question remains what hypotheses about consequences of marital het-
erogamy can be deduced from the present approach to stratification. At
first sight, the model of status inconsistency seems to be suitable for the
analysis of marriages in which husbands and wives differ in their respective
social characteristics. Watson and Barth (1964, p. 16) have therefore
proposed this as a “logical extension” of inconsistency research (see also
Barth and Watson 1967, p. 400). Superficially considered, there is already
a difference between inconsistency at the individual and inconsistency at
the familial level. At the individual level, it is necessary to postulate that
(1) a number of parallel vertical hierarchies exist, and (2) the consistency
of various combinations of status attributes is defined by socially estab-
lished sets of rules and norms (Lenski 1954, p. 405; Meyer and Hammond
1971, p. 92; Randall and Strasser 1976). In the case of homogamy, at
least the first of these postulates seems unnecessary since husband and
wife may be compared on one and the same status dimension. But since
such a comparison will scarcely make sense unless the second assumption
is valid, too, the difficulties of inconsistency analysis are hardly overcome.

The present approach, however, diverges in a fundamental way from
the inconsistency approach. Macrosocial properties like education and oc-
cupation are not considered here as separate independent dimensions of
something like a “stratification space.” Instead, they are considered im-
portant only to the degree that they are related to specific features of
the process of individual and collective identity formation. In this per-
spective, heterogamy is expected to have effects on the marital relationship
particularly if it involves differences in social experiences, attitudes, and
behavior. Barth and Watson (1967, p. 400) have expressed this point of
view well: “Class-linked differences in life-style involve different attitudes,
beliefs, values, habits, interests, activities and possessions. Therefore, it
seems likely that the presence in the same nuclear family of parents from
different occupational worlds, and/or with other life-style related differ-
ences, and/or from families of orientation of different life-styles, would
generate various dilemmas for all family members. Pressures to participate
in different types of literature, to rear different types of children using
different types of social controls, would complicate the organization of
family activities.” I have quoted this passage because it makes plausible
why heterogamy may have significant consequences but at the same time
conceives them in the traditional manner. In fact, like studies of incon-
sistency (see Randall and Strasser 1976, p. 2), discussions of the conse-
quences of heterogamy have been rather one-sided insofar as they focus
almost exclusively on negative consequences for the individual partners.

It seems untenable, however, to assume that heterogamy can lead only
to negative consequences for the marital relationship. Glenn et al. (1974a,
p. 543) have argued that “there are theoretical reasons to expect a dis-
similarity in class backgrounds to exert an integrative influence on certain
marriages under certain conditions.” In fact, one generalization found
frequently in textbooks on marriage and family—namely, that dissimilarity
of childhood class backgrounds of spouses contributes to marital malad-
justment and divorce—receives almost no empirical support (Glenn et al.
19745). Similarly, studies comparing the extent of heterogamy among
divorced and nondivorced couples could find only weak evidence for a
higher incidence of heterogamy among the divorced. In fact, this hypothesis
appears to apply only among couples with extreme differences in their
respective status attributes (Bumpass and Sweet 1972; Boigeol and Com-
maille 1974).

The one-sidedness and failure of many hypotheses about the conse-
quences of marital heterogamy are based on a theoretical bias inherent
in the inconsistency approach to stratification. If the geometrical analogy
is taken seriously, it is obvious to argue that inconsistency and heterog-
amy as such will have definite consequences (see Hope 1972). This as-
sumption, however, is questionable in view of the fact that the conse-
quences of heterogamy are quite different according to its origin and
direction. According to Pearlin (1975, p. 356), this fact disproves a theory
of stratification based on cultural differences since it seems “not consistent
with the fact that those marrying up are much less likely to have marital
disruptions than those marrying down although cultural differences are
equally present in each group.” The latter fact, however, does not prove
the irrelevance of culture- or subculture-based explanations of conse-
quences of heterogamy; it shows only that such differences have an op-
posite meaning in up- and downward movements within the status struc-
ture. The reason is obvious. Whereas in most instances social ascent means
an improvement of one’s overall life situation, social descent may involve
considerable deprivation. Whereas in most cases social ascent may have
been actively striven for, partly through “anticipatory socialization,” quite
different kinds of aspirations and expectations may have preceded and
accompanied experiences of social descent. But here again it would be
erroneous simply to conclude that the person downwardly mobile through
marriage goes through only negative experiences (just as it would be
erroneous to see only the positive aspects of marrying up). The broad-
ening of one’s mind as well as effects on intrafamilial influence and power
(Szinovacz 1973, pp. 213-20) would have to be weighed against the feared
or real loss in status (see also Haller 1974).

An explanation of consequences of marital heterogamy (and status in-
consistency in general) based on cultural differences between strata has
to be supplemented, therefore, by a “theory of social position” (see Bou-
don 1974, p. 29; Cherkaoui and Lindsey 1977). Such a theory must
specify the fundamental differences in social situation, experiences, and
ambitions of people located at different points in the social hierarchy or
having experienced different forms of social mobility. From this point of
view, it is evident that much of the social and cultural identity of persons
and groups develops out of their particular position, deprived or privileged,
low or high, in the class and status structure. Since upward and downward
marital mobility have fundamentally different meanings, it is evident by
now that it hardly makes sense to hypothesize that marital heterogamy
can have only negative effects.

It is only such an extended perspective that enables us to see and eval-
uate the macrosocial potential of marriage patterns and marriage policy
as strategies to reduce social distance between strata and to further social
equality and justice. While marriage doubtless offers possibilities in this
regard, they are clearly limited because the task of bridging social and
cultural barriers through marriage is imposed exclusively on individual
persons and families. From this point of view, it is evident that there
exists a dilemma in modern society over the “incompatibility between
family stability and equalitarianism as values,” deriving from the fact
“that the kinds of kinship paradigm which seem to promote family stabil-
ity are those that apparently function to perpetuate class stratification
in society” (Farber 1970, p. 93; see also Curtis 1964).

This dilemma, however, is not necessarily inherent in the relationship
between marriage and social differentiation. It can become attenuated to
the degree that two forms of societal development can be implemented:
first, new guiding images and styles of life related to marriage (e.g., a
greater involvement of husbands) and more adequate forms of public sup-
port for families and children with particular problems (e.g., single par-
ents) and, second, a reduction of social inequality in those spheres where
CONCLUSION

According to M. G. Wenger (1977), a new “nonegalitarian” but “classless”
paradigm for the study of social inequality has emerged in postwar West-
ern sociology. Central to this development is the putative Weberian con-
cept of “status groups” as opposed to that of “social classes.” Its essential
feature is a view of advanced societies as characterized by high degrees
of social mobility, by a growing “middle mass” and an embourgeoisement
of the working class. Wenger shows, however, that such a conception in
no way does justice to Weber’s concept of ‘‘Sténde,” which denotes almost
the opposite of “status groups” in the aforementioned sense; as such it
refers to a process of social closure initiated by elites in order to preserve
their privileges and thus fosters a retrograde, not a progressive, social
outcome (see also Mayer 1977, pp. 159-62).

Recently the dominant research tradition in the area of stratification
and mobility has been criticized also from a Marxist point of view (Pou-
lantzas 1975; Kirchberger 1975). In this perspective, the idea of a societal
hierarchy is nothing more than an ideology serving the interests of the
ruling class. In a postscript to his impressive essay “Two and a Half
Models of Social Structure,” Bertaux (1973, p. 150) has argued that
even in the study of the reproductive aspects of social life the class struc-
ture approach “proves far more efficient . . . than the far more refined
and ‘consistent’ stratificationist approach.” Indeed, several sociologists
have already taken some steps in this direction by developing “conflict
theories” of social stratification (e.g., Lenski 1954; Collins 1971; Morgan
1975; Archibald 1976).

In this paper, I have proposed an alternative strategy. I have argued
that the long-term reproduction of social inequality should be explained
by distinguishing between two different kinds of mechanisms: social strati-
fication and class formation. The essence of social stratification concerns
the inter- and intragenerational reproduction of social inequality through
homogamous marriage patterns and status inheritance over families and
generations. In this approach, individual actors and their social relations,
not social norms and roles, constitute the basic units of analysis, It is
possible, therefore, to avoid many of the ideological implications of the
traditional approach to stratification as far as structure and functions of
marriage and family are concerned but at the same time to allow for the
fact that conflict, deprivation, and even exploitation are present within
types of intimate social relations, too. From this point of view, marriage
and family have to be considered concrete, historically rooted institutions.
As such, they are not only dependent on the outcome of class formation
and class conflict; they themselves contribute to the maintenance and
reproduction of social inequality. From this point of view, the deduction
drawn by J. Kellerhals from his analysis of social inequality in family
life is wholly justified: “Terminons en disant que, dans ce qui précéde,
la famille a toujours été envisagée comme variable dépendante du systéme
de stratification. Une analyse plus compléte des rapports entre ces deux
sous-systémes demanderait que l’on s’interroge sur la question de savoir
dans quelle mesure la famille est elle-eméme un agent de reproduction soci-
ale” (Kellerhals 1974, p. 484).1®

Marriages and families doubtless are dependent on material and insti-
tutional support by society at large, and they are also deprived or priv-
ileged according to the position of their members in the macrosocial struc-
tures of inequality. But as systems of social relationships consisting of
responsible individual actors they do not react mechanically to these and
other macrosocial pressures and demands.
Archibald, W. Peter. 1976. “Face-to-Face: The Alienating Effects of Class, Status and
Power Divisions.” American Sociological Review 41 (October): 819-37.

Baltzell, E. Digby. 1958. Philadelphia Gentlemen: The Making of a National Upper
Class. New York: Free Press.

Banton, Michael. 1960. “Social Distance: A New Appreciation.” Sociological Review
8:169-83.

Barber, Bernard. 1957. Social Stratification. New York: Harcourt Brace.

Barth, Ernest T. A., and Walter B. Watson. 1967. “Social Stratification and the Family
in Mass Society.” Social Forces 45 (3): 392-401.

Bendix, Reinhard. 1974. “Inequality and Social Structure: A Comparison of Marx and
Weber.” American Sociological Review 39 (April): 149-61.

Berger, Peter, and Hansfried Kellner. 1970. “Marriage and the Construction of Real-
ity.” Pp. 50-73 in Recent Sociology, edited by Hans P. Dreitzel. No. 2, Patterns of
Communicative Behavior. New York: Macmillan.

Bertaux, Daniel. 1973. “Two and a Half Models of Social Structure.” Pp. 117-51 in
Social Stratification and Career Mobility, edited by Walter Miiller and Karl U.
Mayer. Paris: Mouton.

Beshers, James M. 1963. “Urban Social Structure as a Single Hierarchy.” Social Forces
41 (March): 233-39.

Blau, Peter M. 1974. “Presidential Address: Parameters of Social Structure.” American
Sociological Review 39 (October): 615-35.

Blau, Peter M., and Otis D. Duncan. 1967. The American Occupational Structure. New
York: Wiley.

Blumer, Herbert. 1962. “Society as Symbolic Interaction.” Pp. 179-92 in Human Be-
havior and Social Processes, edited by A. M. Rose. London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul.

Boigeol, Anne, and Jacques Commaille. 1974. “Divorce, milieu social et situation de la
femme.” Economie et statistique 53 (February): 3-21.

Bolton, Charles D. 1961. “Mate Selection as the Development of a Relationship.” Mar-
riage and Family Living 24 (August): 234-40.

Boudon, Raymond. 1974. Education, Opportunity and Social Inequality. New York:
Wiley.

Bowles, Samuel, and Herbert Gintis. 1976. Schooling in Capitalist America. New York:
Basic.

Brandwein, Ruth A., C. A. Brown, and E. M. Fox. 1974. “Women and Children Lost:
The Social Situation of Divorced Mothers and Their Families.” Journal of Marriage
and the Family 36 (3): 498-514.

Broderick, Carlfred B., and Mary W. Hicks. 1970. “Zu einer Typologie von Verhal-
tensmustern bei der Brautwerbung.” Kélner Zeitschrift fiir Soziologie und Sozialpsy-
chologie (Special Issue: “Soziologie der Familie”) 14:473-89.

Bumpass, Larry L., and James A. Sweet. 1972. “Differentials in Marital Instability:
1970.” American Sociological Review 37 (December): 754-66.

Burchard, Walter W. 1960. “The Status of ‘Status.’” Sociology and Social Research
44:417-23.

Cancian, Francesca. 1975. What Are Norms? London: Cambridge University Press.

Carter, Hugh, and Paul C. Glick. 1970. Marriage and Divorce. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press.

Chase, Ivan D. 1975. “A Comparison of Men’s and Women’s Intergenerational Mo-
bility in the United States.” American Sociological Review 40 (August): 483-505.
Cherkaoui, Mohamed, and James Lindsey. 1977. “Problémes de mesure des classes so-
ciales: Des indices du status aux modéles d’analyse des rapports de classe.” Revue

francaise de sociologie 18:233-70.

Chester, Robert, ed. 1977. Divorce in Europe. Leiden: Nijhoff.

Cicourel, Aaron. 1970. “Basic and Normative Rules in the Negotiation of Status and
Role.” Pp. 4-45 in Recent Sociology, edited by Hans P. Dreitzel. No. 2, Patterns of
Communicative Behavior. New York: Macmillan.
Coleman, John A. 1966. “A Paradigm for the Study of Social Strata.” Sociology and
Social Research 50:338-50.

Coleman, Richard P., and Bernice L. Neugarten. 1971. Social Status in the City. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Collins, Randall. 1971. “A Conflict Theory of Sexual Stratification.” Social Problems
19 (1): 3-21.

Curtis, Richard F. 1964. “Differential Association and the Stratification of the Urban
Community.” Social Forces 42:68-77.

Dahrendorf, Ralf. 1959. Class and Class Conflict in Industrial Society. London: Rout-
ledge & Kegan Paul.

DeJong, P., M. J. Brawer, and S. S. Robin. 1971. “Patterns of Female Intergenera-
tional Occupational Mobility: A Comparison with Male Patterns of Intergeneration-
al Occupational Mobility.” American Sociological Review 36 (December): 1033-42.

Donati, Pierpaolo. 1978. Sociologia della famiglia. Bologna: Libraria Universitaria.

Donati, Pierpaolo, and G. Nicoletti. 1974. “Famiglia, adozione e servizi sociali: una
ricerca sociologica.” Ricerca sociale 5:53-72.

Duncan, Otis D. 1968. “Social Stratification and Mobility: Problems in the Measure-
ment of Trend.” Pp. 675-719 in Indicators of Social Change, edited by E. B. Sheldon
and W. E. Moore. New York: Russell Sage.

Eckland, Bruce. 1968. “Theories of Mate Selection.” Eugenics Quarterly 15 (2): 71-84.

Eisenstadt, S. N. 1970. “Status Segregation and Status Association in Modern Soci-
eties.” Sociology and Social Research 54:425-40.

Elder, Glen H. 1969. “Appearance and Education in Marriage Mobility.” American
Sociological Review 34 (August): 519-33.

Ellis, Robert A. 1958. “The Continuum Theory of Social Class: A Critical Note.”
Sociology and Social Research 42:269-73.

Fallers, Lloyd L. 1966. “Social Stratification and Economic Processes in Africa.” Pp.
141-49 in Class, Status, and Power, edited by Reinhard Bendix and Seymour M.
Lipset. New York: Free Press.

Farber, Bernard. 1970. “Marriage Law, Kinship Paradigms, and Family Stability.”
Pp. 79-96 in Images and Counter-Images of Young Families, edited by C. Presvelou.
Louvain: ICOFA.

Featherman, David, and Robert M. Hauser. 1976. “Sexual Inequalities and Socioeco-
nomic Achievement in the United States.” American Sociological Review 41 (June):
462-83.

Felson, Marcus, and David Knoke. 1974. “Social Status and the Married Woman.”
Journal of Marriage and the Family 36 (August): 516-21.

Findl, Peter. 1978. “Familienbildung und Familienstruktur nach soziodkonomischen
Merkmalen.” Pp. 832-72 in Strukturen der sozialen Ungleichheit in Osterreich, by
Max Haller et al., vol. 3. Vienna: Institute for Advanced Studies.

Fletcher, Ronald. 1966. The Family and Marriage in Britain. Harmondsworth, Middle-
sex: Penguin.

Garrison, R. J., V. E. Anderson, and S. C. Reed. 1968. “Assortative Marriage.”
Eugenics Quarterly 15:113-27.

Gedicks, Al. 1977. “Class Solidarity and Labor Radicalism among Finnish Immigrants
in Michigan Copper Country.” Politics and Society 7 (2): 127-55.

Giddens, Anthony. 1973. The Class Structure of the Advanced Societies. London:
Hutchinson.

Glass, David V., ed. 1954. Social Mobility in Britain. London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul.

Glenn, N. D., S. K. Hoppe, and D. Weiner. 1974a. “Social Class Heterogamy and
Marital Success: A Study of the Empirical Adequacy of a Textbook Generaliza-
tion.” Social Problems 21:539-50.

Glenn, N. D., A. A. Ross, and J. C. Tully. 19746. “Patterns of Intergenerational Mo-
bility through Marriage.” American Sociological Review 39 (October): 683-99.

Goffman, Erving. 1951. “Symbols of Class Status.” British Journal of Sociology 2:
294-304.
. 1959. The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. New York: Doubleday.

Goldhamer, Herbert, and Edward A. Shils. 1969. “Types of Power and Status.” Pp.
145-54 in Sociological Theory: A Sourcebook of Readings, edited by L. A. Coser and
B. Berelson. New York: Macmillan.

Goode, William J. 1966. “Family and Mobility.” Pp. 582-601 in Class, Status, and
Power, edited by Reinhard Bendix and Seymour M. Lipset. New York: Free Press.

. 1970. “Marital Satisfaction and Instability: A Cross-cultural Analysis of Di-
vorce.” Pp. 154-70 in Readings on Social Stratification, edited by M. M. Tumin.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

Goody, Jack. 1971. “Class and Marriage in Africa and Eurasia.” American Journal of
Sociology 76 (January): 585-603.

Grenseth, Erik. 1970. “The Dysfunctionality of the Husband Provider Role in Indus-
trialized Societies.” Paper presented at the 7th World Congress of Sociology, Varna.

Habermas, Jiirgen. 1968. “Arbeit und Interaktion.” Pp. 9-47 in Technik und Wissen-
schaft als “Ideologie.” Frankfurt: Suhrkamp.

Haller, Archibald O. 1970. “Changes in the Structure of Status Systems.” Rural Soci-
ology 35 (December): 469-87.

Haller, Max. 1973a. “Die Frau in der Gesellschaft. II. Band: Familie und soziale Mo-
bilitat.” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Vienna.

. 1973b. “Social Stratification and the Life Cycle of Young Families.” Paper

presented at the 13th International Family Research Seminar, Paris.

. 1974, “Patterns and Consequences of Intergenerational Social Mobility of

Women.” Paper presented at the 8th World Congress of Sociology, Toronto.

. 1976. “Familienpolitik als Klassenpolitik: Kritische Anmerkungen aus sozio-

logischer Sicht.” Pp. 9-20 in Familienplanung 1976, edited by Osterreichische Ge-

sellschaft fiir Familienplanung. Vienna: OeGfF.

. 1977, “Austria.” Pp. 211-51 in Chester 1977.

. 1980. “Das Heiratsinserat: Ein Beispiel fiir die Interdependenz von Status-
hierarchie und Heiratsmarkt.” Osterreichische Zeitschrift fiir Soziologie, in press.

Haller, Max, and Leopold Rosenmayr. 1971. “The Pluridimensionality of Work Com-
mitment.” Human Relations 24 (6): 501-18.

Haug, Marie R. 1973. “Social Class Measurement and Women’s Occupational Roles.”
Social Forces 52 (1): 501-18.

Havens, Elizabeth M. 1973. “Women, Work and Wedlock: A Note on Female Marital
Patterns in the United States.” American Journal of Sociology 78 (January): 975-
81.

Hazelrigg, L. E., and J. Lopreato. 1972. “Heterogamy, Interclass Mobility and Socio-
political Attitudes in Italy.” American Sociological Review 37 (June): 264-77.

Hechter, Michael. 1976. “Response to Cohen: Max Weber on Ethnicity and Ethnic
Change.” American Journal of Sociology 81 (March): 1162-68.

. 1978. “Group Formation and the Cultural Division of Labor.” American Jour-
nal of Sociology 84 (September): 293-318.

Hope, Keith, ed. 1972. The Analysis of Social Mobility. Oxford: Clarendon.

Ingham, G. K. 1970. “Social Stratification: Individual Attributes and Social Relation-
ships.” Sociology 4:105-13.

Jarvie, I. C. 1972. Concepts and Society. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

Jennings, M. Kent, and Richard G. Niemi. 1971. “The Division of Political Labor be-
tween Mothers and Fathers.” American Political Science Review 65 (March): 69-
82.

Kellerhals, Jean. 1974. “Dimensions familiales de la stratification.” Revue frangaise de
sociologie 15:459-86.

Kemper, Theodore D. 1973. “The Fundamental Dimensions of Social Relationship:
A Theoretical Statement.” Acta Sociologica 16 (1): 41-58.

Kerckhoff, Alan C. 1964. “Patterns of Homogamy and the Field of Eligibles.” Social
Forces 42 (March): 289-97.

Kirchberger, Stefan. 1975. Kritik der Schichtungs- und Mobilitatsforschung. Frank-
furt: Campus.
Kohn, Melvin. 1969. Class and Conformity: A Study in Values. Homewood, Ill.: Dorsey.

Krauss, Irving. 1967. “Some Perspectives on Social Stratification and Social Class.”
Sociological Review 15 (2): 129-40.

. 1976. Stratification, Class, and Conflict. New York: Free Press.

Kreckel, Reinhard. 1976. “Dimensions of Social Inequality—Conceptual Analysis and
Theory of Society.” Sociologische Gids 6:338-62.

Lasswell, Thomas E., and Sandra L. Benbrooke. 1974. “Social Stratification.” Annals
(July): 105-37.

Laumann, Edward O. 1966. Prestige and Association in an Urban Community. India-
napolis: Bobbs-Merrill.

. 1973. Bonds of Pluralism: The Form and Substance of Urban Social Networks.
New York: Wiley.

Leach, Edmund R. 1970. “Caste, Class and Slavery: The Taxonomic Problem.” Pp.
83-94 in The Logic of Social Hierarchies, edited by Edward O. Laumann, P. Siegel,
and R. W. Hodge. Chicago: Markham.

Lebergott, Stanley. 1976. The American Economy: Income, Wealth and Want. Prince-
ton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Lenski, Gerhard E. 1954. Power and Privilege: A Theory of Social Stratification. New
York: McGraw-Hill.

Lipset, Seymour M. 1964. “The Sources of the ‘Radical Right.’” Pp. 307-71 in The
Radical Right, edited by D. Bell. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday.

Lopata, Helena Z. 1973. “Self-Identity in Marriage and Widowhood.” Sociological
Quarterly 14 (Summer): 209-32.

McCall, George J., and J. L. Simmons. 1966. Interactions and Identities. New York:
Free Press,

McClendon, McKee J. 1976. “The Occupational Status Attainment Processes of Males
and Females.” American Sociological Review 41 (February): 52-64.

McFarland, David D., and Daniel J. Brown. 1973. “Social Distance as a Metric: A
Systematic Introduction to Smallest Space Analysis.” Pp. 213-53 in Laumann 1973.

Martindale, Don. 1972. “The Theory of Stratification.” Pp. 209-32 in Issues in Social
Inequality, edited by G. W. Thielbar and S. D. Feldman. Boston: Little, Brown.

Mayer, Karl U. 1977. “Statushierarchie und Heiratsmarkt.” Pp. 155-232 in Klassen-
lagen und Sozialstruktur, by J. Handl et al. Frankfurt: Campus.

Mertesdorf, Frank. 1967. “Der Ehevermittler.” Pp. 51-85 in Soziologische Probleme
mittelsténdischer Berufe. Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag.

Meyer, John W., and Philipp E. Hammond. 1971. “Forms of Status Inconsistency.”
Social Forces 50 (September): 91-101.

Montague, Joel B. 1956. “Class or Status Society.” Sociology and Social Research 40:
333-38.

Morgan, D. H. J. 1975. Social Theory and the Family. London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul.

Miiller, Walter. 1975. Familie—Schule—Beruf. Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag.

Oldman, D., and R. Illsley. 1966. “Measuring the Status of Occupations.” Sociological
Review 14:53-72.

Otto, Luther B. 1975. “Class and Status in Family Research.” Journal of Marriage and
the Family 37 (May): 315-32.

Pappi, Franz Urban. 1973. “Sozialstruktur und soziale Schichtung in einer Kleinstadt
mit heterogener Bevolkerung.” Kélner Zeitschrift fiir Soziologie und Sozialpsychologie
25 (1): 23-74.

. 1976. “Soziale Schichten als Interaktionsgruppen: Zur Messung eines ‘deskrip-
tiven’ Schichtbegriffs.” Pp. 223-42 in Zwischenbilanz der Soziologie, edited by R. M.
Lepsius. Stuttgart: Enke.

Parkin, Frank. 1971. Class Inequality and Political Order. London: McGibbon & Kee.

———. 1974. “Strategies of Social Closure in Class Formation.” In The Social Analy-
sis of Class Structure, edited by Frank Parkin. London: Tavistock.

Parsons, Talcott. (1940) 1954a. “An Analytical Approach to the Theory of Social
Stratification.” Pp. 69-88 in Essays in Sociological Theory. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press.
. (1942) 1954b. “Age and Sex in the Social Structure of the United States.”

Pp. 89-103 in Essays in Sociological Theory. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press.

. (1953) 1966. “A Revised Analytical Approach to the Theory of Social Strati-

fication.” Pp. 92-128 in Class, Status, and Power, edited by Reinhard Bendix and

Seymour M. Lipset. New York: Free Press.

. 1970. “Equality and Inequality in Modern Society, or Social Stratification Re-
visited.” Pp. 13-72 in Social Stratification, edited by Edward O. Laumann. India-
napolis: Bobbs-Merrill.

Pavalko, Ronald M., and N. Nager. 1968. “Contingencies of Marriage to High-Status
Men.” Social Forces 46 (4): 523-31.

Pearlin, Leonard I. 1975. “Status Inequality and Stress in Marriage.” American Socio-
logical Review 40 (June): 344-57.

Pfautz, H. W., and Otis D. Duncan. 1950. “A Critical Evaluation of Warner’s Work in
Community Stratification.” American Sociological Review 15 (April): 205-15.

Poulantzas, Nicos. 1975. Classes in Contemporary Capitalism. London: NLB.

Przeworski, Adam. 1977. “The Process of Class Formation from Karl Kautsky’s The
Class Struggle to Recent Controversies.” Politics and Society 7 (4): 343-401.

Randall, Susan C., and Hermann Strasser. 1976. Status Inconsistency Reconsidered:
Theoretical Problems and Neglected Consequences. Vienna: Institute for Advanced
Studies.

Reuband, Karl H. 1974. “Differentielle Assoziation und soziale Schichtung.” Ph.D. dis-
sertation, University of Hamburg.

Ridge, J. M. 1974. Mobility in Britain Reconsidered. Oxford: Clarendon.

Ritter, Kathleen V., and Lowell L. Hargens. 1975. “Occupational Positions and Class
Identifications of Married Working Women: A Test of the Asymmetry Hypothesis.”
American Journal of Sociology 80 (January): 934-48.

Rose, Arnold M. 1958. “The Concept of Class and American Sociology.” Social Research
15:53-69.

Rosenmayr, Leopold, Henrik Kreutz, and Eva Kockeis. 1966. Kulturelle Interessen von
Jugendlichen. Vienna: Hollinek.

Rossi, Peter H., et al. 1974. “Measuring Household Social Standing.” Social Science
Research 3 (June): 169-90.

Roussel, Louis, et al. 1975. Le Divorce et les francais. Paris: Presses Universitaires de
France.

Rubin, Zick. 1968. “Do American Women Marry Up?” American Sociological Review
33 (October): 750-60.

Runciman, Walter G. 1968. “Class, Status and Power?” Pp. 25-61 in Social Stratifica-
tion, edited by J. A. Jackson. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Safilios-Rothschild, Constantina. 1975. “Family and Stratification: Some Macrosocio-
logical Observations and Hypotheses.” Journal of Marriage and the Family 37 (No-
vember): 855-60.

Scanzoni, John H. 1970. Opportunity and the Family. New York: Free Press.

Scheiblechner, Hartmann. 1971. “The Separation of Individual- and System-Influences
on Behavior in Social Contexts.” Acta Psychologica 35:442-60.

Schmitt, Madeline H. 1972. “Near and Far: A Reformulation of the Social Distance
Concept.” Sociology and Social Research 57:85-97.

Schumpeter, Joseph. 1951. Imperialism and Social Classes. New York: New American
Library.

Scott, John F. 1972. “Stratification and the Family: Status Ascription and Stratum
Mobility.” Pp. 580-97 in Issues in Social Inequality, edited by G. W. Thielbar and
S. D. Feldman. Boston: Little, Brown.

Shils, Edward A. 1962. Encyclopedia Britannica. 14th ed. S.v. “class.”

. 1969. “Reflections on Deference.” Pp. 297-345 in Politics, Personality and So-
cial Science in the Twentieth Century, edited by A. A. Rogow. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.

Simmel, Georg. 1923. Soziologie. Munich: Duncker & Humblot.
Slater, Philip. 1963. “On Social Regression.” American Sociological Review 28 (June):
339-64.

Sgrensen, Aage B. 1979. “A Model and a Metric for the Analysis of the Intragenera-
tional Status Attainment Process.” American Journal of Sociology 85 (September):
361-84.

Stone, Gregory P., and William H. Form. 1953. “Instabilities in Status: The Problem
of Hierarchy in the Community Study of Status Arrangements.” American Socio-
logical Review 18:149-62.

Strasser, Hermann. 1976. “Why Sociological Theories Diverge: The Case of Social
Stratification.” Mimeographed. Vienna: Institute for Advanced Studies.

Sweetser, Dorrian A. 1973. Urban Norwegians: Kinship Networks and Sibling Mo-
bility. Oslo: Institute of Applied Social Research.

Szinovacz, Maximiliane E. 1973. “Entscheidungsstruktur und Aufgabenverteilung in
jungen Familien.” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Vienna.

Talmon, Yonina. 1964. “Mate Selection in Collective Settlements.” American Socio-
logical Review 29 (August): 491-508.

Tausky, Curt. 1965. “Parsons on Stratification: An Analysis and Critique.” Sociologi-
cal Quarterly 6 (2): 128-38.

Tonnies, Ferdinand. 1966. “Estates and Classes.” Pp. 12-21 in Class, Status, and Power,
edited by Reinhard Bendix and Seymour M. Lipset. New York: Free Press.

Treiman, Donald J., and Kermit Terrell. 1975. “Sex and the Process of Status Attain-
ment: A Comparison of Working Women and Men.” American Sociological Review
40 (April): 174-200.

Tyree, Andrea, and Judith Treas. 1974. “The Occupational and Marital Mobility of
Women.” American Sociological Review 39 (June): 293-302.

van den Berghe, Pierre L. 1960. “Distance Mechanisms of Stratification.” Sociology
and Social Research 44:155-64.

Wallerstein, Immanuel. 1975. “Class Formation in the Capitalist World Economy.”
Politics and Society 5 (3): 367-75.

Warner, William L., and Paul S. Lunt. 1941. The Social Life of a Modern Community.
New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.

Watson, Walter B., and Ernest A. T. Barth. 1964. “Questionable Assumptions in the
Theory of Social Stratification.” Pacific Sociological Review 7 (Spring): 10-16.

Weber, Max. 1968. Economy and Society. 3 vols. New York: Bedminster.

Weingart, Peter. 1968. “Herrschaft und Konflikt: Eine Kritik der Kritik Dahrendorfs
an der strukturell-funktionalen Theorie.” Soziale Welt 19:240-67.

Weiser, David J., and Robert J. Magnani. 1976. “Status Disequilibrium and Marital
Happiness.” Paper presented at the 71st annual meeting of the American Sociological
Association, New York.

Wenger, Morton G. 1977. “Ambiguities in the Interpretation and Application of the
Weberian Concept of Stand: Implications for the Study of Inequality Structures.”
Mimeographed. Detroit, Mich.: Wayne State University.

Wright, Erik Olin. 1978. Class, Crisis and the State. London: NLB.

Wrong, Dennis H. 1972. “Social Inequality without Social Stratification.” Pp. 91-104
in Issues in Social Inequality, edited by G. W. Thielbar and S. D. Feldman. Boston:
Little, Brown.
