The Promotion Paradox: Organizational Mortality and Employee Promotion Chances in
Silicon Valley Law Firms, 1946—1996

Author(s): Damon Jeremy Phillips

Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 106, No. 4 (January 2001), pp. 1058-1098
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/320293

Accessed: 08-06-2016 04:28 UTC
INTRODUCTION

Many studies in organizational theory, as well as articles in the popular
press, suggest that employees are most likely to obtain career advancement
and long-term employment within firms that have favorable life chances
(e.g., survival, productivity, profitability). An association between firm life
chances and firm growth underlies this positive relationship (Whetten
1987). Favorable life chances imply more openings within an organization,
generating greater mobility. Indeed, the argument that firm life chances
and employee promotion chances are positively related has great intuitive
appeal.

However, previous findings have underappreciated that a firm’s rela-
tion to its employees and the labor market is affected by its competitive
position. A consideration of the dynamics surrounding the bargaining
strength of an employer suggests that there is a negative relation between
firm life chances and employee promotion chances. In the exchange of
rewards between the employer and employee, the stronger the firm’s bar-
gaining position, the less the firm will be compelled to cede rewards and
resources to the employee in the form of promotions. Therefore, employers
with favorable life chances may actually disadvantage employee attain-
ment. Ironically, this negative relation exists alongside the advantages due
to growth.

Likewise, this negative relation can be predicted from the potential
employee’s perspective if one considers that employees choose jobs as a
function of the expected value of income from employment. Using this
rational choice approach, the expected value is the income earned as a
junior employee plus the probability of being promoted times the net
present value of the income stream associated with being a senior em-
ployee, manager, or owner.’ If the expected value is observable and con-
stant across all firms, there is a tradeoff between promotion rates and the
net present value of the income stream. In other words, firms that are
more likely to fail offer less future income and thus must offer a higher
promotion rate to recruit employees.’

This rational choice perspective is consistent with the bargaining power
approach since firms with favorable life chances have bargaining strength
to the extent that they have resources that members of the labor market
value: higher future income. Similar to the notion of bargaining power
within economics (see Lindblom 1948; Lindbeck and Snower 1986), per-
spectives on the employment relationship are most effective when they
are consistent from both the perspective of the employer and employee
(Siow 1994). It is reasonable to expect that the bargaining power and
individual rational choice explanations are consistent rather than in com-
petition. Whether due to the career choices of potential employees eval-
uating the firm’s competitive position, or firm decisions that incorporate
its competitive position, the resulting prediction is that there exists a
negative relation between firm life chances and employee promotion
chances.

This article focuses on the likelihood of making partner in a law firm
from the firm’s perspective. The bulk of the sociological research pointing
to a relationship between firm life chances (e.g., firm growth) and employee
promotion chances features conceptual and empirical analyses from the
The Relationship between Organizational and Career Processes

This research agenda fills a void in our understanding of the relationship
between organizational and career processes. Within the organizations
community, the open-systems perspective has made commonplace our
understanding that an organization’s environment has relevant ramifi-
cations for the strategy, structure, and life chances of firms (Lawrence and
Lorsch 1967; Meyer and Rowan 1977; Hannan and Freeman 1977; Scott
1992).

Despite this acknowledgement, researchers of labor markets and careers
have yet to fully incorporate the relationship between employers and their
environment to understanding stratification, in general, and career pro-
cesses, in particular (Baron and Bielby 1980). Most studies have focused
on individual or positional influences on promotion or the effect of or-
ganizational or environmental characteristics on the existence of employ-
ment-related structures. For example, studies of within-firm promotions
have often focused on the role of vacancy chains and their relationship
to the employer’s growth (White 1970; Stewman and Konda 1983; Wholey
1985; Rosenbaum 1989).

Less often do scholars of employee opportunity structures examine the
impact of the organization’s success and fitness—with respect to its en-
vironment—on the career trajectories of its members. Some studies have
examined how labor supply, labor demand (Bridges and Villemez 1991),
and institutional pressures (Baron, Davis-Black, and Bielby 1986; Edel-
man 1990) affect the creation and evolution of internal labor markets.
Unfortunately, these studies do not explore whether the existence of formal
opportunity structures are influenced by an employer’s performance.
Moreover, these studies do not directly examine career trajectories, rather
they seek to explain the existence of particular bureaucratic governance
structures of opportunity and control. While we tend to infer promotion
patterns based on organizational structures, we are unable to understand
the variance within particular formal structures due to organizational life
chances.

Thus, while the scholarship on internal labor markets and promotion
chances has been a substantial contribution to organizational sociology,
we have not fully developed an understanding of how career trajectories
are influenced by the fate of the employer—where career trajectories are
embedded. I argue that fruitful insights can be obtained by understanding
how employee opportunity structures are influenced by an employer’s
relationship to its ecological niche. To date, there have been few attempts
to develop a research agenda capable of linking firm survival and career
mobility.

Research is moving in this direction, however. Brittain and Wholey
(1991) examine the effect of industry volatility and uncertainty on quits
and layoffs. However, they do not consider firms as instruments through
which environmental pressures influence career trajectories. Haveman
and Cohen (1994) show that population dynamics (e.g., foundings, merg-
ers, and dissolutions) create and destroy jobs, thus generating career mo-
bility. Drawing insight from the vacancy chain perspective, their study
traces a clear link between population dynamics and job changes, marking
a new path of research that examines the consequences of firm life chances
on individual mobility. In another study that simultaneously considers
organizational and career processes, Sgrensen (1999) addresses how the
structure of competition affects patterns of career mobility. He finds that
firms that recruit from the same sources as their competitors have lower
growth rates, due to the competition in the more dense regions of the
labor market. While these studies have advanced the understanding of
the relationship between firms and individual mobility, there exist many
unanswered questions. Without further developing an understanding of
the relationship between a population of firms and the careers of indi-
viduals, the conclusions made by organizational theorists and career re-
searchers will be sorely incomplete.

One key to further understanding the relationship between the fate of
firms and individual careers is exploring the relationship between a firm’s
life chances and the promotion chances of individuals that work within
them. This article seeks to demonstrate that contradictory outcomes exist
and shape the opportunity structure of individual careers. That is, there
is a negative relation between firm life chances and the promotion chances
of its employees. Moreover, it uses bargaining power as a conceptual
framework for understanding why this relation exists. In essence, firm
life chances are associated with the firm’s bargaining strength in the
employment relationship.' Employers with strong life chances (ie.,
BACKGROUND AND THEORY
Organizational Growth and Employee Promotion Chances

The intuition that there is a positive relationship between employer and
employee success is supported by studies that examine the impact of
organizational growth on employee promotions (Stewman and Konda
1983; Rosenbaum 1984; Wholey 1985). While a conclusion drawn by other
sociologists as well as economists (Chiang 1986; Holzer 1991), much of
the research linking growth and promotion chances has been developed
by scholars in the vacancy chain tradition (White 1970). This research is
accompanied by articles in the business popular press that claim long-
term employment and employee advancement occur in successful firms
(e.g., Hatvany and Pucik 1981).

White’s (1970) seminal work introduced vacancy chains into discussions
of mobility by noting how the retirement of Methodist clergy initiated a
chain of vacancies filled sequentially by an occupant in a lower rank.
Using insights from White (1970) and Keyfitz (1973), Stewman and Konda
(1983; Stewman 1986) developed and refined a model of multiple grade
ratios to predict promotion patterns. In addition to factors such as cohort
size and exit rate, Stewman and Konda (1983) found that the rate of
promotions increases with organizational growth. The logic is straight-
forward: organizational growth involves the creation of new vacancies at
the top and new subunits throughout the organization, which leads to
them being filled by new hires and lower-ranked employees. Thus,
whereas a retirement was the catalyst for increased attainment by lower-
ranked employees in White (1970), organizational growth was also iden-
tified as a mechanism for attainment.

The relationship between firm growth and the probability of promotion
is not confined to vacancy chain research however. Rosenbaum (1984)
argues, with empirical evidence, that firm growth allows more people to
be winners in a tournament selection. Pfeffer (1983) uses an analysis of
a US. railway industry case study from 1885 to 1940 (Morris 1973) to
draw a similar conclusion. He shows that a lack of growth is one of the

chances, I expect my arguments to hold for other indicators of firm strength. For
institutions that rarely fail, such as universities, one would require an indicator of firm
strength that is more appropriate for the context.
factors responsible for a firm’s inability to hold or attract young talent.
The increasing net loss of talent resulted in further performance problems
and organizational decline, leading to the failure of some of the organi-
zations in the railroad industry.

The extension of each of these arguments is that there is a positive
relation between the life chances of firms and the promotion chances of
its employees. However, I argue that alongside the positive contribution
of firm growth to employee promotion chances, a negative relation, also
associated with firm life chances, exists. This relationship is captured with
the following insight: favorable life chances are associated with bargaining
power on the part of the firm. Bargaining power privileges the firm to
limit the resources it shares with its employees without detrimental con-
sequences. This view is consistent with Sgrensen and Kalleberg (1981)
and Sgrensen (1983) in their argument that employers turn away from
internal promotions and toward the external labor market to the extent
that the employer has greater power than the employee. Promotions are
one of the rewards and resources that employers concede when their
advantage is weakened.
lationship between firm strength and promotion can be derived from the
perspective of the potential employee. Two assumptions are necessary.
First, firm strength is correlated with profits the firm shares with those
promoted. In other words, stronger firms have greater rewards to share
with their members than do weaker firms. Second, potential employees
are able to select employers with the goal of maximizing their expected
value of income. The potential employee is able to distinguish a set of
employers on the probability of promotion and the rewards given to those
promoted. The expected value of income is a function of rewards given
to those promoted, as well as the probability of promotion.

Given these two assumptions, weaker firms must offer higher proba-
bilities of promotion in order to attract potential employees. The rela-
tionship between firm strength and promotion chances is a result of po-
tential employees rationally choosing employers based on a calculation of
expected future income. The stronger the firm’s competitive position, the
greater its rewards to those promoted and the greater its ability to min-
imize the probability of promotion promised to potential employees. Com-
petitive strength gives the employer the ability to offer lower promotion
without punishment from the labor market.

Similarly, one may reasonably posit that firms with strong life chances
offer highly valued jobs that reward their employees with highly observ-
able and positive information about their individual talent. Employees
take jobs at firms with strong life chances because it will imply that they
are high-quality employees. Future income is expected to be higher when
an employee is seeking a job in firms with greater firm strength since
employment increases the income of future jobs. In this case, firms with
highly valued jobs are able to offer lower chances of promotion in
exchange for inferring the talent of its employees. Bargaining power, in
this case, is derived from the signaling ability of firms with strong life
chances.

This phenomenon is one that I term the promotion paradox. Firms with
strong life chances (e.g., survival, productivity, profitability, etc.) have
greater bargaining power than do firms with weak life chances. Similar
to Hannan’s (1998) use of firms occupying robust and fragile positions,
strong life chances allow a firm to be less susceptible to environmental
variation and shocks (such as labor turnover). While occupying strong
competitive positions allows a firm to attract and retain employees seeking
to obtain a share of the firm’s resources, the firm is able to deny the same
resources to many employees without severe penalty. When coupled with
the fact that weak life chances reflect a firm that has a high likelihood
of failure, firms at risk of failure become the contexts for employee
promotions.

This proposition has both counterintuitive and paradoxical elements.
First, it argues against the intuition derived from vacancy chain and
organizational growth studies, in addition to reports in the popular lit-
erature. Whereas these contributions suggest that firms with strong life
chances are also the best context for employee promotions, I modify the
argument. Independent of firm growth rates, firms with weak life chances
(i.e., having a high risk of failure) are the best contexts for employee
promotions. Second, the proposition is paradoxical. If promotion occurs
more often in firms that have a high likelihood of failure, there is a risk
of seeking tenure in a firm that is likely to fail. Firm failure, as Haveman
and Cohen (1994) demonstrate, is tantamount to the destruction of one’s
job. I argue that it is exactly this tension that often describes the em-
ployment relationship.

To be clear, I am not arguing that the prevalence of vacancies is ir-
relevant to promotions. It is tautologically true that a job must exist if
an individual is to fill it. Rather, I would argue that vacancy-based per-
spectives tend to remain agnostic about conditions that lead to the creation
of vacancies. Bargaining power is one important determinant of when
vacancies are actually created.
DATA AND METHOD
Context

I test my proposition using longitudinal data on Silicon Valley law firms
and cohorts of attorneys that work within the firms. Law firms are an
appropriate context for testing my proposition for three related but distinct
reasons. First, promotion to partner is clearly a substantial increase in
both the associate’s pecuniary and nonpecuniary rewards. By using law
firms, one avoids employment contexts in which pay and promotions are
decoupled. In essence, the relationship between firm strength and ad-
vancement is less “noisy” than other work arrangements. Second, law
firms allow a clear distinction between the firm and its employees. The
firm is the set of partners, whereas the employees are the associates. In
many contexts, this distinction is less clear, and in some cases, it is con-
tinuous rather than qualitative. Third, law firms emphasize promotion
from within. Wholey (1985) notes that candidates for promotion to partner
are much more likely to be those hired initially as first-year associates
than a lateral hire from another law firm. Therefore, law firms are a
sensible case for an initial test of my proposition. I use the period from
1946 to 1996 to observe firm failures and individual promotions. Given
that the emergence of Silicon Valley is attributed to events that occurred
after World War II (Saxenian 1981), starting the observation period in
Santa Clara County and the Emergence of Silicon Valley: A Synopsis

While the geographic region nicknamed Silicon Valley is now known as
a center for high-tech research and entrepreneurial activity, the pre-World
War II characterization of the region (Santa Clara County) was that of
fertile agricultural soil (Saxenian 1981). World War II was the turning
point for the county’s shift to a technological economy. The war served
as a catalyst for the creation of many organizations, such as Hewlett
Packard. Eventually, through the founding of technological firms by Stan-
ford graduates and spin-offs from existing firms, a critical mass of elec-
tronics-based firms arose, facilitating the emergence of a semiconductor
industry. A steady growth in the success and prominence of these firms
eventually led to the term “Silicon Valley,” coined around 1971 by an
electronics trade publication journalist.

It is within this context that a niche for lawyers and their firms opened
and expanded. Silicon Valley has an abundance of technologically oriented
corporate clients for law firms. While not every Silicon Valley law firm
seeks and serves high-tech corporate clients, a large part of the legal
community is directly or indirectly dependent upon the success of the
technologically oriented industries. In addition to corporate clients, Silicon
Valley has a large supply of well-educated individual clients, with rela-
tively high incomes (Saxenian 1981). These clients require their own legal
representation and advice.
an incentive system or motivating device used by employers (Stinchcombe
1974). The transition from associate to partner is accompanied by in-
creased attainment, as well as a new functional role within the firm.
Partnership encompasses several new tasks and responsibilities, empha-
sizing a different set of skills in firm management that transcends the
traditional tasks involved with practicing law as an associate (Nelson
1988).

Clients prefer and tend to have strong relations with a firm’s partners
over its associates, giving the partners a source of bargaining power (Smi-
gel 1969, pp. 156-60). However, Smigel (1969) distinguishes between large
and small firms by noting that small firm associates are often encouraged
to establish strong ties with clients. In the large firms studied, associate
contact is deemphasized (p. 201). This observation is consistent with other
accounts given by attorneys distinguishing between small and large law
firms (Pyszka and Clark 1997). To the extent that firm size is consistent
with firm strength, Smigel’s (1969) observation suggests that one way in
which a firm’s lower bargaining power is manifested is through policies
that dictate an associate’s access to sources of revenue.

The decision to promote to partner typically involves both objective
and subjective measures. Objectively, partners consider an associate’s
number of billable hours and papers or briefs written. In addition, it is
typical for partners to consider both the state of the legal market and the
firm’s economic situation when making promotion decisions (Gilson and
Mnookin 1989; Hildebrandt 1989; Greene 1999). Subjectively, partners
consider an associate’s untested ability to attract, retain, and enhance the
firm’s client relations. Since many of these factors are exogenous to as-
sociates, it is difficult for associates to predict their promotion chances or
verify that the firm is faithfully executing the up-and-out contract (Kahn
and Huberman 1988; Gilson and Mnookin 1989; Kordana 1995; Schmidt
1998).
Data

The data were collected from annual Martindale-Hubbell directories using
the 1945 edition through the 1996 edition, for law firms and attorneys in
Silicon Valley, California (Martindale-Hubbell 1945-96). Galanter and
Palay (1991) note that while being the most comprehensive legal direc-
tories available, the Martindale-Hubbell directories only list those attor-
neys that have passed the bar examination. As a result, associates that
pass the bar after the firm is surveyed must wait another year before
being included in the directory. This creates a potential error in the mea-
surement and estimation of an associate’s tenure, a control variable in
the promotion model. In addition, the Martindale-Hubbell Law Directory
is like all directories of organizations with an unknown probability of
excluding very small and short-lived organizations (< 1 year). To the extent
that this occurs, one would expect this bias to make the task of demon-
strating a liability of newness (Freeman, Carroll, and Hannan 1983) more
difficult.

Silicon Valley is a relatively self-contained market for legal services in
Northern California (Suchman 1993; Escher and Morze 1998), making its
choice as a context appropriate.* In this study, Silicon Valley comprises
the following ten cities: Redwood City, Menlo Park, Palo Alto, Los Altos,
Mountain View, Sunnyvale, Santa Clara, Cupertino, Campbell, and San
Jose. In 1996, Silicon Valley hosted 209 law partnerships employing 2,375
active attorneys. The directories list attorney and law firm characteristics
and, when followed across time, provide information on the life chances
of law firms and the mobility of the attorneys that work within them.
This collection generated data on 512 law partnerships across the 50 years,
which comprises every firm listed with more than one active attorney
(Le., solo practitioners are excluded).’

In addition to coding firm-level data, the Martindale-Hubbell direc-
tories were used to collect data on 12 cohorts of attorneys in Silicon Valley
firms at four-year intervals, beginning in 1946 and ending in 1990. Only
those attorneys hired directly out of law school or after a one-year clerk-
ship are included. Within a cohort, the attorney’s demographic charac-
teristics and background, employer, and position in the firm are coded
annually until they exit the labor market, or become right-censored at
1996. This generated a total of 443 attorneys. Supplementary data on law
firm practice areas and employee demographics was collected from the
National Association for Law Placement Directory of Legal Employers
(1991-96) and the Legal Directory of the Santa Clara County Bar As-
sociation (1967-96).
Firm characteristics —Each firm’s age is simply recorded as the num-
ber of years since the firm first appeared in the Martindale-Hubbell Law
Directory biographical section. Firm size is operationalized in two ways:
(1) the total number of full-time partners and (2) the total number of full-
time associates. This distinction is important given the law firm context.
The number of partners captures ownership size, whereas the number of
associates captures the number of employees. Given this distinction, it is
clear that employee size more easily captures the concept of organizational
size, as considered in organizational sociology (Scott 1992). In contrast,
there is little to guide our understanding of ownership size in the pro-
motion context. Therefore, it will be important to examine each opera-
tionalization of size independently. Given that the distribution of firm
sizes is log-normal (skewed to reflect a few relatively large firms), the log
of each size variable is coded."

It is convention within the study of law firms to consider the ratio of
associates to partners. Profits primarily come from the firm’s ability to
leverage the skills of the partners with the efforts of the associates. As a
measure of firm leverage, the ratio of associates to partners serves as a
proxy for firm performance and a mechanism that drives promotion rates
(Galanter and Palay 1991). Firms with greater leverage are considered to
be stronger firms, with lower promotion rates.

A well-specified model that includes the ratio of associates to partners
as an interaction effect requires the inclusion of the inverse of the number
of partners instead of the number of partners (Bradshaw and Radbill
1987). There is no theoretical justification for including the inverse of
the number of partners in a model of employee promotion. Rather, using
partnership and associate size as separate components, instead of the ratio
of associates to partners, provides a theoretically consistent model with
easily interpretable results. This is especially the case since, in this data,
the ratio is highly correlated to the number of associates.’ Examining the
effect of the number of associates, while controlling for the number of
partners, is preferred to inserting the associate to partner ratio as an
interaction effect.

Firm scope is operationalized as a continuous variable from 0 to 1. It
captures the number of law practice areas that a law firm reports in the
Martindale-Hubbell Law Directory in a particular year, divided by the
total number of practice areas that are reported across all firms in that
year. For example, if a firm in a certain year practices law in eight areas,
but a maximum of 16 areas of law are possible, the firm’s scope is half
of the total market. Since the number of practice areas grows from eight
possible areas in 1946 to 79 possible areas in 1996, this measurement
allows a relative measurement of firm scope. Given that the Silicon Valley
legal community is in its early stages and has yet to reach maturity, it is
difficult to directly test Carroll’s (1985) predictions. However, if Carroll
(1985) is correct, midrange firms should be facing higher failure rates as
they become the victims of generalists’ competitive pressures. Accordingly,
I will test for this indicator by including a quadratic term for firm scope.

Population density —Population density is calculated as the log of the
total number of law firms in Silicon Valley for a given year. For the
promotion to partner models, I also calculated the log of the number of
law firms in Silicon Valley that hired at least one associate. Since not
every firm hires associates in a given year, the hiring density may provide
a better indicator of competition for labor.

Firm status—Firm status is operationalized as the proportion of the
firm’s attorneys that have degrees from six elite law schools (Yale, Har-
vard, Columbia, New York, Stanford, and Chicago) within the law firm.
The greater the number, the greater the firm’s social status. These law
schools were selected by examining the legal affiliations of individuals in
national and regional institutions (political and economic) since World
War II. An assortment of methods was used to acquire this information:
recording the affiliations of individuals in Who’s Who entries, National
Law Journal lists of prominent attorneys, local politicians and judges,
and so on.
There are several alternative explanations or potential sources of unob-
served heterogeneity that can be addressed with the use of control var-
iables. Prominent among these variables is whether the firm is one of
many offices, whether the subset of the area of law that a firm practices
is specific to individual clients or corporate clients, the rate of partner
growth and turnover, the particular era or time period in question, and
the individual characteristics of the employee.

Branch or single office —A dummy variable is coded “1” if the focal
firm is one of many offices. It is likely that multiple (branch) office firms
affect, and are affected by, the competitive landscape differently than
single office firms.

Individual versus corporate clients —Heinz and Laumann (1982) in
their study of the Chicago bar found that one of the most distinguishing
dimensions along which lawyer competition and interaction takes place
is whether the types of law that a firm practices address the needs of
individual clients as well as corporate clients. Firms that have individuals
as customers compose a social system that is distinguishable from those
firms that focus solely on corporate customers. To capture this effect, a
variable is coded “1” if the firm practices any areas of law that pertain
to individual clients (e.g., family law, probate and estate, etc.). Otherwise,
the variable is coded “0.”

A representative listing of each firm’s clients would also be informative
to this study. Unfortunately, a complete listing of clients for each firm in
Silicon Valley from 1946 to 1996 does not exist. Moreover, the subset of
firms that provides a representative list of their clients does not do so
reliably. Fortunately, much of the variance of firm clientele tends to be
captured by the firm’s size (larger firms have larger corporate clients) and
the individual client dummy variable used here (Smigel 1969; Heinz and
Laumann 1982).

Growth and partner turnover.—Proportional growth of the number of
partners is coded to capture the rate with which the firm is creating and
filling new vacancies for partnership. To capture promotions due to part-
ners leaving the firm and creating vacancies to be filled, a variable is
coded to capture the proportion of partners to leave in the past year. This
variable also controls for the effect of firm failure due to partners aban-
doning the firm. Each of these variables addresses two aspects of the
vacancy chain argument: vacancies are created by growth, and vacancies
are created by the departure of senior members.

Period effects Four dummy variables are coded to capture activity
before 1970, between 1970 and 1986, between 1987 and 1991, and between
1992 and 1996. Before 1970, there was little change in the social and
economic landscape of Silicon Valley. However, beginning around 1970,
Silicon Valley experienced a period of rapid growth, lasting until the stock
market drop and subsequent recession (1987-91). Finally, the years 1992
to 1996 are coded to capture the beginning of the postrecession era. These
dummy variables serve to capture some of the unobserved heterogeneity
that may be due to the time period that the firm or attorney may exist
in.

Individual characteristics —Organizational demography and career
mobility researchers have identified individual-level factors that influence
promotion chances. Here, I include the attorney’s age, plus six dummy
variables. Each attorney’s date of birth is given in the Martindale-Hubbell
Law Directory. Age has competing effects. New employees who are
younger than the average new hire are often assumed to be more qualified
(Rosenbaum 1984). On the other hand, age also reflects work force ex-
perience, which would enhance one’s promotion chances. Age is obtained
from each attorney’s reported date of birth.

A dummy variable is included to capture whether the attorney is a
woman. If the new hire attended an elite law school (Yale, Harvard,
Stanford, Columbia, New York, and Chicago), a dummy variable was
coded “1.” Finally, there are three indicators of associate quality: (1) grad-
uated with magna/summa cum laude, (2) was a member of an honors
society, and (3) served as a law clerk for a judge.
estimation of the changes of the event occurring while controlling for age
dependence (Tuma and Hannan 1984).

I model the hazard rate of firm failure and promotion with piecewise
constant exponential models. This approach allows the inclusion of firm
age (in the failure rate model) and attorney tenure (in the promotion rate
model), while avoiding misspecification that accompanies other functional
forms. A piecewise constant exponential model splits the time axis into
time periods. In the model for firm failure, the time axis is split according
to firm age, whereas in the model for promotions, the axis is split according
to employee tenure. It assumes that transition rates are constant in each
of these intervals. However, base rates vary freely across time periods.
The assumption is that the period-specific baseline rate can vary across
time periods, but the covariates have the same (proportional) effects (Roh-
wer 1993).

The resulting model gives an age dependent constant (a “y-intercept”)
for each time piece of the model. There are different strategies for choosing
the appropriate time periods. To estimate this model, it is important to
choose time segments that are long enough to contain a meaningful num-
ber of events (i.e., firm failures). For example, a firm age segment from
20 to 22 years old could not be estimated if no firms fail within this age
window. Some theoretical predictions may require that the time periods
take on particular values. In my model, I assume no a priori knowledge
of age dependence. The null is an exponential hazard rate model without
time periods (where it is assumed that rates are time invariant). From
this baseline, I only include those time periods that led to an improvement
in the chi-square fit of the failure rate model (P < 0.05). As a result, the
y-intercepts included in the model are statistically significant with respect
to a chi-squared model improvement test.
is a drop in the number of law firms, which recovers after 1991, continuing
on the same slope until the end of the observation period in 1996. Figure
2 shows the number of law firm foundings and failures over the same
time period. Again, most of the activity begins after 1966 and increases
until 1986. In 1987, it appears that the drop in population is due to a
large reduction in the number of foundings combined with a slight increase
in the number of failures. The number of foundings recovers by 1992,
however, and continues to increase.

Figure 3 is a bar graph showing a count of the number of new hires
sampled in each cohort (the striped bar). The second (dark colored) bar
is a count of the subset of new hires that were eventually promoted. Most
of the new hires sampled represent cohorts from 1966 forward. A relatively
large fraction of those hired in 1970 were eventually promoted to partner.
The slopes of the new hires and the subset eventually promoted both
increase, albeit at drastically different rates. The number of new hires
increases at a much higher rate than the subset of those eventually pro-
moted. The fact that the 1990 cohort is right censored implies that the
subset of new hires promoted is incomplete. This figure does not include
any new hires promoted after 1996.

Figure 4 is a graph reporting the number of years to promotion for the
87 associates that were promoted to partner. While it is clear that most
of the promotions occur in the fifth to the eighth year, 25.3% of the
associates were promoted in less than 5 years. It appears that there are
two peaks. The first peak reveals that some attorneys are promoted as
early as their second and third years of tenure. The second peak occurs
“In an effort to understand whether early promotions occurred across cohorts, and
varied with the size or age of the firm, I examined the raw data. It appears that the
early promotions are more likely to occur in the earlier cohorts. However, early pro-
motions are distributed across cohorts, with some occurring in the 1990 cohort. There
does not appear to be a statistically strong relationship with respect to firm size or
age. Spurr (1987), using data from 14 large New York law firms from 1969 to 1973,
found that promotions ranged from 3 years to over 10 years, with fewer early pro-
motions than appear in my data. He found that law firms that handled bigger claims
waited longer to promote.

‘ST also tested for density dependence (Hannan and Carroll 1992) but found no effect.
A priori, there is no reason to expect that Silicon Valley law firms from 1946 to 1996
would be subject to legitimation effects. By 1946, law firms were in existence and part
of the cognitive awareness in northern California, and thus legitimated since at least
the late-1800s (Hubbell Legal Directory 1889).
(P < 0.01), demonstrating the lower likelihood of failure attributed to high
status (Podolny 1993; Park 1997).

Therefore, low competition, older age, larger size, and higher status all
lower the likelihood of failure. The effect of scope is curvilinear but clearly
shows that generalists have stronger life chances. In many ways, the
ecological competition of law firms resembles the contexts of breweries,
newspapers, hotels, and other contexts that ecologists have studied. Next,
I test the relationship between these indicators of firm strength and the
likelihood of associate promotions.

The models for predicting the likelihood of promotion are presented in
table 2. If my thesis is correct, the greater the probability of law firm
failure, the greater the likelihood of associate promotion to partner. I test
this thesis by examining the effect of the probability of failure indepen-
dently of the population and firm-level covariates, and with these cov-
ariates in the model as well. Including the individual-level covariates in
the full model (models 4 and 6) allows the observation of the direct effects
of each variable on the promotion rate, as well as their indirect contri-
bution to the likelihood of failure. Furthermore, it insures that the prob-
ability of failure cannot be explained away by including the population
and firm-level variables. I test the proposed relationship between firm life
chances and associate promotion chances directly by estimating the effect
of the predicted probability of firm failure on the likelihood of promotion.

In model 1 of table 2, the y-intercepts for tenure verify that promotion
chances improve with tenure. Consistent with past research on the pro-
motion chances by sex, women are less likely to be promoted (P < 0.05).
Older new hires (P < 0.10), members of honor societies (P < 0.05), and
elite law school graduates (P < 0.05) have higher rates of promotion. These
models also include controls for the cohort that the attorney was sampled
from. The cohort controls indicate that attorneys hired in 1970 have the
highest likelihood of promotion with respect to the reference category
(1946-66). This cohort coincides with the emergence of Silicon Valley.

Except for population density, model 1 shows that each of the covariates
are in the expected direction and statistically significant. While not sta-
tistically significant, population density decreases the likelihood of pro-
motion. Model 2, which substitutes the logged density of firms that hired
in the most previous cohort, provides a more labor market specific measure
of competition. Showing evidence of oligopolistic power, model 2 reveals
that for those cohorts in which less than eight firms hired all of the
associates, there is a negative relation between hiring density and pro-
motion chances. When hiring density is greater than eight (the average
hiring density is 46.57), there is a positive relation between hiring density
and promotion chances.’®

Firm age is represented as a set of dummy variables that match the
age y-intercepts of the firm failure model (table 1). The reference category
is firms 31 years and older. Strong support would require that each co-
efficient be statistically significant, with descending magnitude. In other
words, the coefficient for firms 0-2 years old should be the largest and
significant, followed by the coefficient for firms 3-5 years, and so on. The
model shows a strong effect for firm age. All age dummy variables are
TABLE 1
MLE or Firm FAILure: SILICON VALLEY LAW FIRMS

 

 

Covariate (1)

 

Firm age:
<2 Years oo. eee eee eee 7.77
TABLE 2
MLE oF PROMOTION RATES: SILICON VALLEY ATTORNEYS

 

 

 

1 2 3 4 5 6° 7*
Tenure:
O-3 years ....... ec e cece cece —4.60 —5.19 —4.89 —5.09 —5.19 —5.14 —5.17

mn oay og wey ay ey og wm
This content downloaded from 170.140.26.180 on Wed, 08 Jun 2016 04:28:48 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
TABLE 2 (Continued)

 

 

MoveL
1970 Feet eee eee eee e eee ee eee
VOT4 occ cee e cece e eee ene
W978 occ e cece cece eee eee eee eens
1982 2... cece eee eee eect eee eee eee es
1986 2.2... eee eee eee eee ee eee tees
1990 Lo. e cece eect eee eee e ees

Max of log likelihood (df) ..............

1.45*
(71)
1.02
(.90)
—.95
(1.08)
—.92
(1.11)
—143
(1.14)
—1.46
(1.24)
—213.65
(29)

2.09**
(.73)
1.12*
(.62)
—3.26**
(1.15)
—4.46**
(1.61)
—7.36**
(2.79)
—8.02**
(3.06)
—212.67
(30)

.78*
(.46)
-99*
(50)
—1.29**
(47)
—1.20**
(.39)
—1.65**
(.38)
—2.07**
(.43)
— 229.96
(17)

87*
(46)
87*
(.50)
—1.46**
(47)
—1.33**
(.40)
—1.70**

(.39)

    
 

 

 

(43)
—224.77
(18)

2.33**
(74)
1.19*
(.63)
—3.54**
(1.18)
—4,83**
(1.65)
—8.04**
(2.88)
—8.85**
(3.16)
—208.19
(32)

85*
(46)
.88*
(50)
—1.58**
(49)
—1.39**
(.40)
—1.75**
(39)
—2.34%*
(45)
—219.48
(17)

2.31**
(74)
1.15**
(.62)
—3.68**
(1.18)
—4,90**
(1.64)
—8.04**
(2.85)
—8.97%*
(3.13)
—202.61
(1)

 

Note.—Data are given for 1,775 person-years, 443 attorneys, and 87 promotions. y-intercepts are x’ tested.
“ Without near-death firms (2% of sample): 1,735 person-years, 85 promotions.

* P <.10, one-tailed tests.
* P< .05.
** P< 01.
significant (P < 0.05), with each dummy variable having a magnitude less
than the previous dummy."”

The two measures of size give opposite findings. Ownership size, given
as the logged number of partners, increases the likelihood of promotion.
The more traditional measure of organizational size, employee size, de-
creases the likelihood of promotion. Both measures are significant at the
P < 0.05 level. Therefore, there is support for employee size, but not
ownership size.

Promotion is less likely in generalist firms, though not statistically sig-
nificant once competition is appropriately specified. While not shown here,
a quadratic representation of generalism was not significant. The fact that
promotion is more likely in firms that have individual clients supports
Heinz and Laumann’s (1982) argument that the higher status and more
selective members of the legal profession are the attorneys and firms that
practice law for corporate clients (also see Abbott 1988). Finally, high
status firms are less likely to promote associates to partners, but similar
to scope, this effect is not significant in model 2.

Models 3-7 test the central proposition, that there is a negative rela-
tionship between a firm’s life chances and the promotion chances of its
employees. Model 3 introduces the predicted probability of firm failure
for the employer, as a predictor of promotion. Using each of the coefficients
from the full firm failure model (table 1), I generate hazard rates of failure
of each of the firms in the promotion sample, according to the firm and
population characteristics each firm faces. Thus, for each person-year,
there exists a hazard rate of failure for the focal attorney’s employer. The
hazard rate is transformed to the predicted probability of firm failure
using the following formulation,

Predicted probability of firm failure = 1 — exp(u"),

where yp” is the hazard rate of firm failure. This transformation is used
by scholars that have similar approaches (Hannan and Carroll 1992; Car-
roll and Harrison 1994; and Lee and Harrison 1998). Interestingly, model
3 reveals that there is no statistically significant linear relationship be-
tween the likelihood of firm failure and associate promotion to partner.
This is surprising given the findings in models 1 and 2 that strongly
support my proposition.

An examination of the distribution of the probability reveals an im-
portant pattern—greater than 98% of the firms have a probability of
failure less than 0.07, while less than 2% have probabilities of failure
between 0.07 and 0.99 (see the appendix for the distribution of proba-
bilities). It is possible that the relationship between the probability of
failure and promotion chances is different for firms with a very high
probability of failure. Specifically, the “promotion paradox” may not apply
to firms that are “near death.”

There are two ways of verifying my contention that the hypothesis does
not hold for firms that are near death. First, including a quadratic term
for the probability of failure should clarify the results and provide a better
model fit. Specifically, the linear term should be positive and the quadratic
term negative. Second, one would expect that running the models without
the 2% of the firms that are the most likely to fail should result in a strong
linear effect for the predicted probability of failure. I use both as a means
of verification.

Models 4 and 5 examine the associate to partner promotion rate with
the quadratic specification. Introducing the quadric term does clarify the
relationship between firm life chances and employee promotion chances.
In model 4, both the linear and squared terms have strong statistical
significance (P < 0.01 and P < 0.05, respectively). Model 5 reveals that
while attenuated, the linear term remains significant (P < 0.05) after the
inclusion of the population and firm-level variables. The quadratic term
is now marginally significant. Interestingly, model 4 also indicates that
several of the population and firm-level variables have direct effects on
the probability of promotion, independent of their contribution to the
likelihood of failure. Strongest among these covariates are the growth
rate, ownership size, and employee size. The dummy variables for an
individual client focus, while attenuated, remain significant as well. The
effect for firm age largely disappears once a firm’s likelihood of failure is
controlled for. Independent of the likelihood of failure, firms ages 10-30
years are the most likely to promote. This result is interesting since many
of the firms 10-30 years old were founded between the years 1966-86.
This period, while profitable, was also highly uncertain, with law firms
pioneering risky fee arrangements with high-tech start-up clientele (Wool-
ley 1992; Chanen 2000). The hiring density remains unchanged from
model 1. This is not surprising since the predicted probability of failure
is calculated using the entire population density, and not the subset mod-
eled in model 5.

Models 6 and 7 examine the promotion to partner likelihood after ex-
cluding the 2% of firms with the greatest likelihood of failure (the near
death firms). The results are consistent with models 4 and 5. Except for
near death firms, there is a statistically strong relationship between the
predicted probability of firm failure and the likelihood of promotion (P
< 0.01). Therefore, both strategies to validate the near death explanation
support this modification to my original thesis.

Overall, the final model supports the proposition that the greater a
Taken together, the results allow us to address the thesis that is central
to this article. There is strong evidence of a negative relation between
firm life chances and employee promotion chances. Law firms that are
young, small, narrow in scope, or lower in status have a higher likelihood
of failure but are also contexts where the likelihood of promotion is high-
est. Moreover, there is a clear relationship between a firm’s likelihood of
failure and the promotion chances of individuals that work within the
firm. Whether through the decision of firms during the tenure of an as-
sociate, or the decision of attorneys in their selection of an employer, firms
with weak life chances have less bargaining power. This lack of bargaining
power results in better promotion chances for employees.

It is likely that near death firms lack the power to retain any of their
employees. At some point, one’s employer is so unattractive that employee
exit is the most likely outcome. In this case, the likelihood of observing
a promotion declines quickly as it becomes clearer that promotion will
have little value. Therefore, while my theory accurately predicts the re-
lationship between the likelihood of failure and the likelihood of pro-
motion for 98% of the cases, a caveat is necessary. The promotion paradox
is relevant in every case except for those firms that are near death.

My prediction with respect to firm age was supported. Silicon Valley
law firms suffer from a liability of newness. Younger firms are the most
likely to fail. This finding is consistent with age dependence in auditing
firms, another professional service firm. Boone, Brocheler, and Carroll
(1998) found that Dutch auditing firms from 1896 to 1970 suffered from
a liability of newness. Their finding for age dependence is less clear after
1970, however, when supply and demand regulations were instituted. The
lack of strength due to its “newness” places a young employer at a dis-
advantage, resulting in higher promotion rates. A young firm does not
have access to all sources of labor, neither is it as readily equipped to
replace lost employees as are more established firms. Furthermore, this
firm is more likely to desire input from new hires concerning the culture
and direction of the organization than would an older firm. The inclusion
of the likelihood of failure into the promotion model significantly dimin-
ishes the effect of firm age, giving stronger reason to consider the “liability
of newness” argument with respect to firm bargaining strength.

Interestingly, the effect for firms between 10 and 30 years old remains
statistically significant once the probability of failure is included. This
suggests that there remain aspects of bargaining power not incorporated
into the law firm’s probability of failure. Given that many of the firms
in this category were founded during the birth and initial rise of Silicon
Valley, there are two potential sources of unobserved heterogeneity. First,
the initial rise in Silicon Valley was characterized by unique fee structures
pioneered by Silicon Valley law firms. These law firms took equity in a
young firm in lieu of standard fees. While becoming increasingly more
common, the strategy is high risk (relying on the success of the new
venture) and was viewed by many more established firms (e.g. New York
and Chicago firms) as unethical. This increased risk may have led to firms
within the 10-30-year age category to lose bargaining power without
having that loss reflected in the firm’s likelihood of failure. Second, 10-30
years of age is the time when the law firm’s original founders reach
retirement age (the average founding age is approximately 42 years old).
It is possible that the uncertainty surrounding the departure of a firm’s
founders reduces the firm’s bargaining power. Since the founder’s age
was not included in generating the probability of law firm failure, I may
have overlooked this source of unobserved heterogeneity. Future research
should examine those populations in which older firms are more likely to
fail, to determine whether the promotion paradox is robust with respect
to firm age.

The findings for organizational size provide fruitful insight. Employee
size, the more traditional interpretation of organizational size, supports
the promotion paradox framework. Large firms are more likely to survive,
and because of their stronger position, they are less likely to promote
associates to partners. Independent of its contribution to the firm’s like-
lihood of failure, there is a direct effect for the number of associates. This
direct effect is in part due to the increased competition between associates
that occurs for coveted partnership positions (ceteris paribus). Indepen-
dent of the effect of size on the firm’s likelihood of failure, the greater
the number of associates, the greater the competition that each associate
faces, thus lowering the likelihood of promotion.

Firms with many owners are less likely to survive and are more likely
to be the contexts for promotions. This result, and its resilience once the
firm’s probability of failure is included, is consistent with other findings
in vacancy chain and graded ratio research (Stewman and Konda 1983).
One difference between my conceptualization and the graded ratio re-
search, however, is in the underlying mechanism. Stewman and Konda
(1983) would model the ratio of partners to associates as the firm structure
that modifies the creation of vacancies through growth and attrition (see
p. 649). I examine the number of partners, associates, attrition, and growth
independently, emphasizing the number of partners and associates as in-
dependent indicators of firm strength and the propensity to promote rather
than factors that modify the creation of vacancies. Despite this difference,
the observed outcome is similar: the more partners a firm has (controlling
for the number of associates), the greater its propensity to promote.

One plausible interpretation of this finding involves the cost of pro-
motion to the original set of partners. Partnership size may reflect the
cost to each partner when a new partner is promoted. For example, if a
firm with only two partners promotes an associate to partner, the division
of profits decreases by 1/6 or 0.167 (1/2 minus 1/3) for the two original
partners. However, if a law firm with 20 partners promotes an associate,
the division of profits decreases by only 0.002 (1/20 minus 1/21). Therefore,
the greater the number of partners, the lower the cost to the average
partner for promoting an associate to share in the profits as a partner.

In support of past research, generalists and high-status employers are
both more likely to survive and less likely to promote (although neither
is statistically significant in the final model). In the context of law firms,
a service industry heavily dependent upon human capital, generalism may
have a different meaning than in past research contexts, such as news-
papers (Carroll 1985). There are two significant differences. The first (a
conceptual difference) is that areas of practice within the legal profession
have a strong component of supply-side social construction. Rich social
processes are involved in determining the value and boundaries of various
specialties of law (Heinz and Laumann 1982; Abbott 1988). Second (an
empirical difference), from 1946 to 1996, the number of distinguishable
areas of law in Silicon Valley increased from eight to approximately 79.
Therefore, what it means to be a generalist necessarily changes. While I
attempted to capture this increased differentiation by operationalizing
generalism relative to the total number of distinguishable areas in a par-
ticular year, understanding the proliferation of practice areas requires
further exploration. In short, future research should examine the role of
generalism in more detail.

The findings on firm status support the notion that high-status firms
have meaningful competitive advantages (Podolny 1993; Park 1997).
High-status law firms have a lower likelihood of failure. Whereas most
in the legal press assume that size and status are interchangeable, I con-
ceptualize and model each factor separately. Indeed, separating these var-
iables yields insight in the study of law firms that have been previously
overlooked.

Contrary to expectations, the results indicate that while not significant,
the greater the population density, the lower the likelihood of promotion.
I expect that the result in model 1 reflects the fact that population density
does not capture labor market competition as well as product market
competition. For the promotion to partner model, the hiring density more
easily captures the competition in the labor market. The finding for the
hiring density suggests that when only a few firms hire associates, these
firms possess oligopolistic (or oligopsonistic) power (Blair and Harrison
1993). In other words, the set of employers may collude with respect to
their hiring and promotion practices in order to avoid interfirm compe-
tition for labor. Once there are greater than eight employers (solving for
the inflection point of the linear and quadratic term), collusion is no longer
possible, and the competition for associates more closely resembles the
neoclassical case of perfect competition. Thus, the majority of associates
in my sample have increased promotion chances due to competition be-
tween firms for labor.

The negative relation between law firm strength and associate pro-
motion chances remains when controlling for demographics (age, race,
and sex), human capital (elite law school, honor society, etc.), being one
of many law offices, firm growth, firm attrition, and whether the firm
seeks individual clients.’* The controls for growth and attrition provide
an interesting method of testing for direct vacancy chain effects. Firm
growth increases the likelihood of promotion, as expected. This finding
verifies past research on the relationship between organizational growth
and promotion chances, while serving as a reminder of the irony of the
promotion paradox. Alongside the advantages due to growth, there is a
negative relation between firm strength and the likelihood of promotion.
Not only may law firm growth increase job opportunities, but it may be
one of the factors that increases the bargaining strength of the firm as
well. Consistent with past work, the results show that firm growth is a
positive and significant predictor of promotion.

These findings are not inconsistent with vacancy chain effects. On the
contrary, they compliment vacancy chain processes. Firm bargaining
strength is the result of the relationship between the firm and its envi-
ronment. This relationship is one mechanism that determines when va-
cancies are opened and closed. Vacancies are created when the employer
Law Firm Employment

First, the legal labor market is a unique market. Most law firms, as
partnerships, have atypical organizational forms. In partnerships, there
is a clear distinction between the firm and the employees. The firm is the
set of partners, and the employees are the associates. Promotions to partner
are largely made from within, rather than laterally. Associates that become
partners are then members of the firm, responsible for making promotion
decisions in the next round.

In contrast, the traditional work arrangement is characterized by a more
continuous relationship between the firm and its employees. Employees
are thought to move up the rungs of a job ladder, where increases in
status and pay associated with each additional rung rarely constitute an
increase on the order of making partner in a law firm. In fact, some
organizations employ symbolic promotions, which are characterized by a
change in job title, but little else. Moreover, the entity making the pro-
motion decisions is often another superior that may not use the firm’s
strength in their decision. Thus, applying the promotion paradox to other
organizational forms may be premature. The evidence demonstrates the
promotion paradox’s relevance to up-or-out partnerships. Future research
Another unique aspect to my study is its location in Silicon Valley. For
both employers and employees, Silicon Valley is a high growth region.
The dynamics of competition and market entry, and thus firm strength,
may be different in more mature industries. Silicon Valley is also a region
characterized by an incredibly low level of unemployment and high com-
pensation. During 1997, the Santa Clara County unemployment rate was
3.1%, the lowest in the United States (4.9%). Furthermore, 1996 income
data reveal that the average annual earning in Silicon Valley was $43,510
compared to $28,040 nationally (Hoffman 1997). Employees, especially
professionals, fear loss of employment or income due to transfer less often
than do employees in other regions of California or the United States.
The great number of exits in my study (recall that only 87 of 463 new
hires were promoted) draws attention to the uniqueness of the law firm
as an employer. Caution must be taken in generalizing results to contexts
that do not reflect these patterns. This may influence the shape of the
bargaining power dynamics in ways that do not exist in most employment
relations.

An interesting aspect of studying Silicon Valley is the opportunity to
investigate the employment relationship within one of the most econom-
ically influential regions in the entire world. To my knowledge, this is the
first in-depth, rigorous analysis of firm competition and career advance-
ment within Silicon Valley to address these issues across a 50-year period.
Thus, while Silicon Valley is unique, it is also critically important for both
scholars and practitioners to glean insight from studies of a region that
has set the technological pulse and direction of the United States and
much of the world.
This study is an important contribution to organization theory, as well
as research on stratification and career mobility. First, it conceptually and
empirically bridges the void between research on organizations as em-
bedded in environments and the career advancement opportunities of the
organization’s employees. Second, the richness of the data allows one to
test alternative hypotheses while exploring new ideas in a way that has
not been possible in past research. For example, while some may argue
that growth or attrition are the covariates of primary relevance, I find
that the promotion paradox exists whether or not these better-known
engines of mobility are controlled for. This is important, for it suggests
that the influence of the firm’s environment is largely independent of the
usual indicators of promotion opportunities. Third, this research advances
the understanding of professional career mobility (attorneys) in service,
human capital intensive, industries (legal services).

One of the most important contributions lies at the theoretical under-
pinnings of this thesis: that there is a significant relationship between an
organization’s life chances and its bargaining strength. Without taking
this relationship into account, along with its implications for organizations
and their employees, we are led to an incomplete interpretation of strat-
ification and career advancement. This research opens more possibilities
for the applications of organizational theory to understanding an indi-
vidual’s structure of opportunity (Baron and Bielby 1980). While this
article focuses on the contributions of organizational ecology and popu-
lation dynamics, there is a larger theme of understanding how the fate
and life chances of firms influences the rewards and opportunities of
individuals that has only begun to be explored.

The findings of this study have particular implications for stratification.
Traditionally, the syntheses between organizations and stratification has
given us the insight that organizational and environmental attributes drive
variation in individual attainment. Much of this work has examined dif-
ferences in opportunity as a function of the firm’s economic sector/industry
and whether the firm has formalized employment structures (Baron 1984).
Extending this research, this article suggests that an associate’s oppor-
tunity structure is also a function the law firm’s competitive strength.
The stratification of Silicon Valley law firm associates is influenced by
the distribution of firm competitive strength within the population. More
mobile (or less stable) careers are positively associated with populations
dominated by law firms with strong life chances. To the extent that a
population of employers has weaker life chances, opportunity structures
become more stable while the rewards of partnership become more likely
to be attained.
The results of this study offer new insights to the study of law firms
in particular. My analyses would argue that modeling law firm promotion
systems as up-and-out firms (O’Flaherty and Siow 1995), professional
labor markets (Wholey 1985), or arenas for tournament-based promotions
(Galanter and Palay 1991) are credible but incomplete representations. A
more complete understanding of organizational influences on attainment
and mobility requires us to better understand the role of the organization’s
environment in influencing bargaining strength.
TABLE A2
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS FOR 1,775 PERSON-YEARS (443 SILICON VALLEY
NEw Hires), 1946-96

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
  

 

 

 

Variable Min Max Mean SD
Tenure (yrs) 1 11 2.97 1.82
Promotion .. 0 1 05 see
Attorney’s age 25 55 31.57 4.63
Female ........ 0 1 235
Elite law school 0 1 18
Magna/summa .. 0 1 09
Honors society 0 1 23
Clerk/extern .. 0 1 04 see
Firm age ... 1 49 15.75 9.53
In(density) .. 2.08 5.34 4.99 45
In(hiring density) . .00 4.09 3.71 64
In(partners) . -00 4.47 2.34 94
In(associates) . 00 5.33 247 1.20
Scope ... O01 62 23 42
Individual clients . 0 1 84
Branch office . 0 1 57 see
Growth (%) .. .00 3.00 20 27
Attrition (%) . -00 56 07 14
Firm status . -00 1.00 23 19

 

Probability of failure ... -00 99 01 08
REFERENCES

Abbott, Andrew. 1988. The System of Professions: An Essay on the Division of Expert
Labor. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Baron, James N. 1984. “Organizational Perspectives on Stratification.” Annual Review
of Sociology 6:737-65.

Baron, James N., and William T. Bielby. 1980. “Bringing the Firms Back In:
Stratification, Segmentation, and the Organization of Work.” American Sociological
Review 45 (5): 737-65.

Baron, James N., Alison Davis-Blake, and William T. Bielby. 1986. “The Structure of
Opportunity: How Promotion Ladders Vary within and among Organizations.”
Administrative Science Quarterly 31:248-73.

Bellows, Paul F. 1987. “Breakups: Facing the Practical Issues.” Legal Economics 13
(4): 25-32.

Blair, Roger D., and Jeffrey L. Harrison. 1993. Monopsony: Antitrust Law and
Economics. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Boone, Christopher, Vera Brocheler, and Glenn R. Carroll. 1998. Custom Service:
Application and Tests of Resource Partitioning Theory among Dutch Auditing Firms
from 1896 to 1992. Working paper. IMIO (Institute of Management, Innovation, and
Organization), University of California, Berkeley.

Bradshaw, York, and Larry Radbill. 1987. “Method and Substance in the Use of Ratio
Variables (in Comments).” American Sociological Review 52 (1): 132-35.

Bridges, William P., and Wayne J. Villemez. 1991. “Employment Relations and the
Labor Market: Integrating Institutional and Market Perspectives.” American
Sociological Review 56:748-64.

Brittain, Jack W., and Douglas R. Wholey. 1991. “Structure as an Environmental
Property: Industry Demographics and Labor Market Practices.” Pp. 155-88 in Social
Mobility and Social Structure, edited by Ronald L. Breiger. New York: Cambridge
University Press.

Carroll, Glenn. 1985. “Concentration and Specialization: Dynamics of Niche Width in
Populations of Organizations.” American Journal of Sociology 90 (6): 1262-83.

Carroll, Glenn R., and J. Richard Harrison. 1994. “On the Historical Efficiency of
Competition between Organizational Populations.” American Journal of Sociology
100 (3): 720-49.
Carroll, Glenn R., and Anand Swaminathan. 2000. “Why the Microbrewery
Movement? Organizational Dynamics of Resource Partitioning in the U.S. Brewing
Industry.” American Journal of Sociology 106 (3): 715-62.

Chamberlain, N. W., and J. W. Kuhn. 1965. Collective Bargaining, 2d ed. New York:
McGraw-Hill.

Chanen, Jill Schachner. 2000. “Banking on Client Futures.” ABA Journal 86 (June):
78.

Chiang, Shin-Hwan. 1986. “Cost Saving, Wages and the Growth of the Firm.”
Economic Journal 96:798-807.

Cyert, Richard M., and James G. March. 1998. A Behavioral Theory of the Firm, 2d
ed. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

Edelman, Lauren B. 1990. “Legal Environments and Organizational Governance: The
Expansion of Due Process in the American Workplace.” American Journal of
Sociology 95:1401-40.

Escher, W. Jon, and Suzanne L. Morze. 1998. “Building a Silicon Valley Office.” White
paper. Major, Hagen, and Africa, San Jose, California.

Freeman, John, Glenn R. Carroll, and Michael T. Hannan. 1983. “The Liability of
Newness: Age Dependence in Organizational Death Rates.” American Sociological
Review 48:692-710.

Galanter, Marc, and Thomas Palay. 1991. Tournament of Lawyers: The Transformation
of the Big Law Firm. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Gilson, Ronald J., and Robert H. Mnookin. 1989. “Coming of Age in a Corporate Law
Firm: The Economics of Associate Career Patterns.” Stanford Law Review 41:
567-95.

Greene, Jenna. 1999. “What It Takes to Make Partner.” Recorder, January 29.

Hannan, Michael T. 1988. “Social Change, Organizational Diversity, and Individual
Careers.” Pp. 48-49 in Social Change and the Life Course, vol. 1. Edited by M. W.
Riley. Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage.

. 1998. “Rethinking Age Dependence in Organizational Mortality: Logical
Formalizations.” American Journal of Sociology 104 (1): 126-64.

Hannan, Michael T.,, and Glenn R. Carroll. 1992. Dynamics of Organizational
Populations. New York: Oxford University Press.

Hannan, Michael T., and John Freeman. 1977. “The Population Ecology of
Organization.” American Journal of Sociology 82:929-64.

Hatvany, Nina, and Vladmir Pucik. 1981. “Japanese Practices and Productivity.”
Organizational Dynamics special feature: 4-22.

Haveman, Heather A., and Lisa E. Cohen. 1994. “The Ecological Dynamics of Careers:
The Impact of Organizational Founding, Dissolution, and Merger of Job Mobility.”
American Journal of Sociology 100 (1): 104-52.

Heinz, John P., and Edward O. Laumann. 1982. Chicago Lawyers: The Social Structure
of the Bar. Evanston, Ill: Northwestern University Press.

Hildebrandt, Bradford W. 1989. “Firms in Trouble.” Pp. 308-39 in Law Office
Management. Commercial Law and Practice Course Handbook, no. 520. New York:
Practicing Law Institute.

Hillman, Robert W. 1990. Law Firm Breakups: The Law and Ethics of Grabbing and
Leaving. Boston: Little, Brown.

Hoffman, Auren. 1997. “Comment: Good Times Aren’t Rolling Throughout State.”
Business Journal, December 22.

Holzer, Harry J. 1991. “Employment, Unemployment and Demand Shifts in Local
Labor Markets.” Review of Economics and Statistics 73 (1): 25-32.

Hubbell Legal Directory. 1889. Hubbell Legal Directory. New York: Hubbell
Publishing.

International Financial Law Review. 1994. “Death of a Law Firm.” International
Financial Law Review 13 (3): 2.
. 1995. “Mid-Size Firms in Trouble in New York.” International Financial Law
Review 14 (12): 2.

Kahn, Charles, and Gur Huberman. 1988. “Two-Sided Uncertainty and ‘Up-or-Out’
Contracts.” Journal of Labor Economics 6 (4): 423-44.

Keyfitz, Nathan. 1973. “The Individual Mobility in a Stationary Society.” Population
Studies 27:335-52.

Kordana, Kevin A. 1995. “Law Firms and Associate Careers: Tournament Theory
versus the Production-Imperative Model.” Yale Law Journal 104:1907-34.

Lawrence, Paul R., and Jay Lorsch. 1967. Organization and Environment: Managing
Differentiation and Integration. Boston: Harvard University, Graduate School of
Business Administration.

Lee, Jeho, and J. Richard Harrison. 1998. “Innovation and Industry Bifurcation: The
Emergence of Strategic Groups.” Working paper. Dallas School of Management,
University of Texas.

Lindbeck, Assar, and Dennis J. Snower. 1986. “Wage Setting, Unemployment, and
Insider-Outsider Relations.” American Economic Review 76 (2): 235-39.

Lindblom, Charles E. 1948. “Bargaining Power in Price and Wage Determination.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 62 (3): 396-417.

Martindale and Hubbell, Inc. 1945-96. Martindale-Hubbell Law Directory. Summit,
N.J.: Martindale & Hubbell.

Meyer, John W., and Brian Rowan. 1977. “Institutionalized Organizations: Formal
Structure as Myth and Ceremony.” American Journal of Sociology 83:340-63.

Morris, S. 1973. “Stalled Professionalism: The Recruitment of Railway Officials in the
United States, 1885-1940.” Business History Review 47:317-34.

National Association for Law Placement. 1991-96. Directory of Legal Employers.
Washington, D.C.: National Association for Law Placement.

Nelson, Robert L. 1988. Partners with Power. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University
of California Press.

O'Flaherty, Brendan, and Aloysius Siow. 1995. “Up-or-Out Rules in the Market for
Lawyers.” Journal of Labor Economics 13 (4): 709-35.

Park, Douglas. 1997. The Competitive Dynamics of Status and Niche Width:
Investment Banking in the United States, 1920-1950. Ph.D. dissertation. Graduate
School of Business, Stanford University.

Pfeffer, Jeffrey. 1981. Power in Organizations. Marshfield, Mass.: Pitman.

1983. “Organizational Demography.” Pp. 299-359 in Research on
Organizational Behavior, vol. 5. Edited by L. L. Cummings and B. Staw. Greenwich,
Conn.: JAI.

Podolny, Joel M. 1993. “A Status-Based Model of Market Competition.” American
Journal of Sociology 98 (4): 829-72.

Pyszka, Gloria, and Lisa Clark. 1997. Wide World of Work: Legal and Nonlegal Careers,
Stanford Law Alumni Talk about Their Choices and Experiences. Stanford, Calif.:
Stanford Law School Office of Career Services.

Rohwer, Gotz. 1993. TDA: Transition Data Analysis, ver. 5.2. Working papers.
Universitat Bochum.

Rosenbaum, James E. 1984. Career Mobility in a Corporate Hierarchy. New York:
Academic Press.

. 1989. “Employee Misperceptions.” Pp. 329-53 in Handbook of Career Theory,
edited by M. B. Arthur, D. T. Hall, and B. S. Lawrence. New York: Cambridge
University Press.

Santa Clara County Bar Association. 1967-96. Legal Directory of the Santa Clara
County Bar Association. San Jose, Calif.: Santa Clara County Bar Association.
Saxenian, Anna Lee. 1981. “Silicon Valley and Spatial Structure: The Industrial Basis
of Urbanization in Santa Clara County, California.” Working Paper no. 345.
University of California, Berkeley, Institute of Urban and Regional Development.
Schelling, Thomas C. 1956. “An Essay on Bargaining.” American Economic Review
46 (3): 281-306.

Schmidt, Sally. 1998. Keeping the Keepers: Strategies for Associate Retention in Times
of Attrition. Washington, D.C.: National Association for Law Placement Foundation
for Research & Education.

Scott, W. Richard. 1992. Organizations: Rational, Natural, and Open Systems, 3d ed.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

Siow, Aloysius. 1994. “Hierarchical Careers.” Industrial Relations 33 (1): 83-105.

Smigel, Erwin O. 1969. The Wall Street Lawyer. Bloomington: Indiana University
Press.

Sgrensen, Aage B. 1983. “Processes of Allocation to Open and Closed Positions in
Social Structure.” Zeitschrift fiir Soziologie 12:203-24.

Sgrensen, Aage, and Arne L. Kalleberg. 1981. “Outline of a Theory for the Matching
of Persons to Jobs.” Pp. 49-74 in Sociological Perspectives on the Labor Market,
edited by Ivar Berg. New York: Academic Press.

Sgrensen, Jesper B. 1999. “Executive Migration and Interorganizational Competition.”
Social Science Research 28:289-315.

Spurr, Stephen J. 1987. “How the Market Solves an Assignment Problem: The
Matching of Lawyers with Legal Claims.” Journal of Labor Economics 5, 4, pt. 1,
502-32.

Stewman, Shelby. 1986. “Demographic Models of Internal Labor Markets.”
Administrative Science Quarterly 31:212-47.

Stewman, Shelby, and Suresh L. Konda. 1983. “Careers and Organizational Labor
Markets: Demographic Models of Organizational Behavior.” American Journal of
Sociology 88 (4): 637-85.

Stinchcombe, Arthur L. 1974. Creating Efficient Industrial Administration. New York:
Basic Books.

Suchman, Mark C. 1993. “On the Role of Law Firms in the Structuration of Silicon
Valley.” Working Paper, ser. 11. Presented to the 1993 Annual Meeting of the Law
and Society Association, Chicago, July.

Tuma, Nancy Brandon, and Michael T. Hannan. 1984. Social Dynamics: Models and
Methods. Orlando, Fla.: Academic Press.

Whetten, David A. 1987. “Organizational Growth and Decline Processes.” Annual
Review of Sociology 13:335-58.

White, Harrison. 1970. Chains of Opportunity: System Models of Mobility in
Organizations. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press

Wholey, Douglas R. 1985. “Determinants of Firm Internal Labor Markets and Large
Law Firms.” Administrative Science Quarterly 30:318-35.

Williamson, Oliver. 1983. “Credible Commitments: Using Hostages to Support
Exchange.” American Economic Review 73:519-40.

Woolley, Scott. 1992. “Law Firm Takes Equity in Lieu of Fees.” Orange County
Business Journal 15 (50): 3.
