Local Marriage Markets and the Marital Behavior of Black and White Women
Author(s): Daniel T. Lichter, Felicia B. LeClere and Diane K. McLaughlin
Source: American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 96, No. 4 (Tan., 1991), pp. 843-867
Published by: The University of Chicago Press

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2780733

Accessed: 08-06-2016 03:54 UTC
Previous research has typically ignored the spatial dimension of
marriage markets, focusing instead on highly aggregated data or
on individual models of entry into marriage. A basic premise of this
study is that national marriage rates are played out across local
marriage-market areas that define female opportunities for mar-
riage. Using local area data from the newly released 1980 Public
Use Microdata Sample (D file), the article provides a direct test of
several alternative explanations of U.S. marital behavior and of
black and white differences in marriage rates. The analysis reveals
that (a) local economic opportunities (including welfare) for females,
spouse availability, and urbanization contribute significantly to spa-
tial variations in female marriage rates, (b) the local supply of eco-
nomically “attractive” males plays an especially large role in the
marital behaviors of U.S. black and white women, and (c) racial
differences in marriage-market conditions accentuate, but do not
explain completely, black-white differences in U.S. marriage rates.
The study reinforces the view that local marriage-market conditions
play a fundamental and often unappreciated role in the marital
search process of American women.
Kluegel 1988; Rodgers and Thornton 1985) or has focused on individual
models of “entry into marriage” (e.g., Michael and Tuma 1985; Gold-
scheider and Waite 1986; Marini 1978). These studies have contributed
significantly to our understanding of recent U.S. patterns of marriage.
Unfortunately, most have ignored the spatial dimension of the mate selec-
tion process. This is potentially problematic because spatial variation in
marriage and family behavior is substantial (Farley 1988; Heaton,
Lichter, and Amoateng 1989), a fact that implies that place of residence
affects marital opportunities by defining the pool of prospective marital
partners. Clearly, an adequate understanding of current marriage pat-
terns requires, minimally, an explicit recognition of the local opportunity
structure for marriage.

The primary objective of this study is to examine patterns of spatial
variation in marriage-market processes in the United States. Specifically,
we identify sources of interarea variation in marriage rates using the
newly created D file of the Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS-D) from
the 1980 decennial U.S. census. This special PUMS file identifies 382
labor-market areas (LMAs) in the United States (Tolbert and Killian
1987), which we treat as marriage-market areas. By examining interarea
variation in marriage patterns, we redress perhaps the most serious prob-
lem with current research on marriage markets—the implicit assumption
that marriage markets are national in scope. The guiding assumption
here is that, for most people, marriage markets operate at a local level
where propinquity makes interaction and marriage possible.

Our focus on local marriage-market areas also provides an unusual
opportunity to examine how female marriage rates are affected by local
economic conditions and employment opportunities, sex-ratio imbal-
ances, and patterns of urbanization. We have two specific objectives.
First, we provide a direct test of three alternative explanations of chang-
ing marriage rates in the United States. Second, we examine sources of
variation in rates of marriage for blacks and whites across U.S. marriage-
market areas. To be sure, differences between African-American and
white marriage markets are generally acknowledged (see, e.g., Teach-
man, Polonko, and Leigh 1987), but most discussions have ignored the
spatial component of marriage markets—an omission we propose to rem-
edy here.
quires some knowledge of the changing ledger sheet of benefits (e.g.,
children, love, and companionship) and costs (including search costs)
associated with marriage. In this regard, Espenshade (1985) has provided
a useful heuristic framework for evaluating U.S. marriage patterns and
differences in them for blacks and whites (for applications, see Farley and
Bianchi [1987]; Trovato [1988]; O’Hare [1988]). Presumably, patterns of
marital and family behavior among American women are located in (1)
the increased economic independence of women, (2) spouse availability
(i.e., sex-ratio imbalances), and (3) modernization and urbanization.
These are not true competitors but instead complement one another in a
broader market-based explanation of marriage. Each can be easily sub-
sumed within the microeconomic model of household production—the
so-called new home economics (Sawhill 1977; Becker 1981).

For example, the female economic independence argument suggests
that the reasons for shifts in marriage rates are largely based on women’s
changing economic incentives to marry (Farley and Bianchi 1987). For
example, according to Becker (1981), the net gains or utility of marriage
should increase with household specialization in which husbands special-
ize in market activities and wives in nonmarket ones. The implication is
that the availability of employment opportunities for women erodes a
fundamental basis for marriage; that is, economic independence affects
women’s decisions to “supply” marriage to the marriage market (Gross-
bard-Shechtman 1981; England and Farkas 1986).

This argument has provided a theoretical foil for recent studies focus-
ing on the marital consequences of women’s employment and other eco-
nomic alternatives (e.g., welfare) to marriage (e.g., Bennett, Bloom, and
Craig 1989; Goldscheider and Waite 1986; Preston and Richards 1975).
Indeed, indirect evidence from repeated cross-sectional studies (using ag-
gregate or national level data) is largely consistent with this hypothesis
(see Espenshade 1985). Increased aggregate expenditures for public assis-
tance (Murray 1984) and reductions in the male-female earnings and
employment gaps since 1970 (Farley and Bianchi 1987) suggest that there
are new alternatives to marriage for many American women. Moreover,
racial differences in the relative economic independence of women may
accentuate black-white differences in marital behavior. Historically, the
percentage of females in the labor force has been higher among African-
American women than among white women (Lichter and Constanzo
1987), and the female-male difference in earnings has been smaller for
blacks than whites (Farley and Bianchi 1987; Espenshade 1985). The
inference seems clear: African-American women may have lower mar-
riage rates because the economic incentives to marry are lower than those
for white women.

The shortage of prospective male partners provides a second explana-
tion of interarea variations in marriage patterns among U.S. women
(Espenshade 1985; Goldman, Westoff, and Hammerslough 1984). This
spouse-availability explanation has two parts—one demographic and the
other economic. First, marriage rates are affected by demographic shifts
in the relative supply of males and females of marriageable age (Gut-
tentag and Secord 1983; Schoen and Kluegel 1988). When men are in
short supply, opportunities to marry presumably decline for females. Sex-
ratio imbalances shift the aggregate demand for marriage or the supply
of potential marital partners (Grossbard-Schechtman 1984). But, at the
national level, the so-called marriage squeeze caused by the maturing of
the baby-boom generation seems inappropriate for explaining the contin-
uing national retreat from marriage after 1980. Indeed, declining fertility
rates in the 1960s produced a surplus of men of marriageable ages in the
1980s competing for a relatively smaller cohort of women two or three
years younger. Despite relatively more opportunities for females to marry
in the 1980s, there is little or no evidence of corresponding increases in
female marriage rates.

Furthermore, Farley and Bianchi (1987) have reported that racial dif-
ferences in availability ratios actually declined during the 1970s and
1980s, while black-white differences in proportions ever married in-
creased. Nevertheless, racial differences in sex-ratio imbalances are ex-
treme (reflecting higher African-American male mortality and incarcera-
tion rates) and may contribute significantly to overall racial differences
in marriage and divorce in local marriage markets (Wilson 1987; Tucker
and Taylor 1989; Kiecolt and Fossett 1989). Clearly, the relative demo-
graphic supply of males and females provides a potentially useful expla-
nation of local area variation in marriage patterns. The national marriage
squeezes documented by Schoen (1983) must be played out in squeezes
across local geographic areas.

The economic part of the availability explanation elaborates this basic
demographic premise. That is, shortages of economically attractive males
may also create disincentives for marriage among females. Men’s eco-
nomic position affects men’s “demand” for marriage and their ability to
attract suitable spouses in the marriage market (Becker 1981). Wilson
(1987) suggests that the shortage of black men (especially those with
adequate employment) is one of the most serious structural impediments
to marriage for African-American women, particularly in large cities.
Indeed, Oppenheimer (1988) criticizes micro models of “entry into mar-
riage” because they are often unrealistically based on the assumption
that marriage is simply a function of women’s family background and
employment circumstances. Issues of spouse availability are typically ig-
nored altogether. Oppenheimer suggests that recent patterns of delayed
marriage among American women may have less to do with women’s
improving economic circumstances (i.e., the women’s independence ar-
gument) than with the changing economic circumstances of prospective
male spouses. Data limitations have prevented most previous micro mar-
riage studies from measuring the effects of shortages of economically
attractive prospective marriage partners, a limitation we address in this
study.

The final argument to be examined is one suggesting that marital be-
havior and family structure are linked to modernization and to the inexo-
rable processes of urbanization and industrialization (see Hareven 1976).
This is an old argument, but one not often tested empirically at the
local area level. Presumably, modernization has gone hand in hand with
cultural shifts away from traditional family and kinship patterns. Em-
phasis is placed increasingly on individualistic values and personal ful-
fillment (Goode 1963). Clearly, the value of children has declined, which
contributes to declines in fertility and affects one of the fundamental
reasons for marriage and for household formation (Becker 1981). Declines
in fertility also reduce the value of nonmarket activities (for females)
while at the same time eroding the advantages of household specialization
and one primary motivation for marriage. Evidence of continuing rural-
urban differences in marriage rates, age at marriage, and the timing of
family formation is consistent with such an explanation (Hogan 1978;
Heaton et al. 1989; Fuguitt, Brown, and Beale 1989). Moreover, racial
differences in urbanization may be useful in explaining black-white dif-
ferences in marriage rates. Blacks in the United States are disproportion-
ately concentrated in urban areas, and black urbanization continues at
a much faster rate than that of whites (Lichter, Heaton, and Fuguitt
1986). To what extent then are black-white differences in marriage sim-
ply reflective of the differences in racial concentration in large cities,
with their apparently corrosive effects on traditional marital and family
arrangements? To our knowledge, this question has not been tested in
previous research.

Together, the three perspectives described above provide a useful con-
ceptual framework for identifying sources of spatial variation in marriage
patterns and black-white differences in the United States. Unfortunately,
previous research is equivocal or provides conflicting results about the
adequacy of each explanation (Trovato 1988; O’Hare 1988). In fact, past
studies provide only indirect evidence for each of the various arguments
discussed here. Evidence that national marriage patterns have changed
systematically with national trends in sex-ratio imbalances, economic
conditions, and urbanization does not provide an adequate test of these
alternative explanations. The previous reliance on data at the national
level or other highly aggregative data seems largely insensitive to the fact
that marriage markets are local—not national—in scope (Catton 1964).
DATA AND MEASUREMENT
Data

The feasibility of testing the hypotheses proposed here hinges on the
availability of information on geographically bounded LMAs. The
PUMS-D of the 1980 U.S. decennial census (Tolbert and Killian 1987)
includes an LMA geographic code for each individual in the sample. The
382 LMAs identified in this file represent multicounty units formed on
the basis of commuting patterns. This data base has spawned a number
of recent studies on rural and urban LMAs (e.g., Tolbert 1989; Ticka-
myer and Bokemeier 1988) but, to our knowledge, has not been used to
identify spatially based marriage-market areas.

Hogan (1989) has argued that “marriage-market studies have rarely
used employment information and have almost never considered local
markets (communities) sufficiently so as to serve as adequate tests of
Wilson’s [1987] marriage-market thesis” (p. 45). The labor markets iden-
tified in the PUMS-D allow us to address this criticism by providing a
unique opportunity to study the relationship between specific local area
conditions and marriage patterns. Labor-market areas represent appro-
priate geographic fields of interaction for prospective marital partners.
They may cross state lines, need not include an urban center, and encom-
pass all counties and county equivalents in the United States. This inclu-
sive feature of the LMAs represents a clear advantage over previous
ecological analyses by Preston and Richards (1975) and White (1981),
which were based on 1960 and 1970 census SMSA data of proportions
ever married at ages 22—24. Likewise, O’Hare’s (1988) ecological analysis
of families headed by black females is limited to 49 metropolitan statisti-
cal areas. Clearly, which geographic scale (e.g., neighborhoods, cities,
or LMAs) is most appropriate for analyzing local marriage markets is an
empirical question. Our approach nevertheless has advantages over past
studies using only national data or micro data sets that have typically
ignored local marriage-market conditions altogether.

Despite the obvious advantages of census data for the study of mar-
riage (see Sweet and Bumpass [1987] for discussion), only information
about current marital status is available in the PUMS-D. Hence, our
analyses are necessarily restricted to prevalence measures of marital be-
havior, such as the proportion ever married. Other sources, such as mar-
Measurement and Analytic Strategy

Past studies typically have measured changes or racial differences in
female proportions ever married (Farley and Bianchi 1987; Preston and
Richards 1975; White 1981). This prevalence measure has some desirable
properties. The proportion ever married at age x, for example, is equal
to the negative exponential of the cumulative first-marriage rates of fe-
males aged x (see, e.g., Preston and Richards 1975). For purposes of
comparison, we likewise calculate the ever-married rate, defined at the
LMA level as the proportion of ever-married women aged 20-29. In
addition, we consider two other marriage rates as dependent variables.
The current marriage rate is defined as the LMA proportion of currently
married females aged 20—29. Our focus on young women is appropriate
because, unlike older women, these women typically have been married
for only a short period (thus approximating rates of incidence). We also
calculate the recent marriage rate for each LMA.’ These rates are com-
puted as the proportion of women aged 20-29 who have been married
less than five years. The PUMS-D includes an item on age at first mar-
riage, which makes this computation possible. The main advantage of
this indicator is that it measures recent LMA marriage rates, which can
be related more closely to marriage-market conditions at the time of the
1980 census.

Our analytic strategy is to fit several weighted least squares (WLS)
models of proportions ever married, currently married, and recently mar-
ried, using LMAs as units of analysis. These units vary greatly in popula-
tion size, which means that measurement error is likely to be greater in
smaller than in larger LMAs. Consequently, our analysis weights each
LMA by its population size, in accordance with a weighting scheme
recommended by Neter, Wasserman, and Kutner (1985, pp. 363-64).
On substantive grounds, weighting places greater emphasis on areas with
the largest populations. Moreover, weighting is desirable on methodologi-
cal grounds because it reduces the importance of high variability in
smaller LMAs.

These WLS models include several indicators of local area conditions,
which are defined in table 1, along with the mean and standard deviation
of each. First, the economic independence argument suggests that areas
with greater opportunities for female employment and higher remunera-
tion will provide alternatives to marriage and will create fewer financial
incentives for women to marry. Here, the labor-force participation rate
of unmarried women aged 20—29 in each LMA provides an indicator of
the extent of local female employment opportunities (and thus an alterna-
tive to marriage).* Mean female earnings for full-time, full-year workers
aged 20—29 provides a second indicator of financial independence. Pre-
sumably, as the employment opportunities and earnings of women in-
crease within LMAs, marriage rates should decline. Finally, because it
is sometimes argued that the growth of the welfare state has created
disincentives for marriage (for extended discussion, see Espenshade
[1985] and Wilson [1987]), we consider the effect of mean public assis-
tance (among all women receiving assistance) on marriage rates. This
indicator, used previously by O’Hare (1988), is preferred to the propor-
tion receiving public assistance, which is affected by the local marital
status composition and economic conditions.

Second, the availability-of-spouses argument suggests that interarea
variation in marriage rates can be explained by (1) local area surpluses
or deficits in the demographic supply of males and (2) the economic
attractiveness of prospective male partners in marriage. The relative sup-
ply of males is measured by the sex ratio, defined as the ratio of males
to females at ages 20—29.* We expect a positive relationship between the
local sex ratio and marriage rates; LMAs with male deficits should have
lower rates of female marriage. In addition, as a measure of the economic
attractiveness of prospective male partners, we include both the nonem-
ployment rate and mean earnings of full-time, full-year male workers
aged 20-29. Local areas with high male nonemployment rates (the non-
employed designation includes both the unemployed and those not in the
labor force) and low male earnings presumably provide females with
fewer opportunities for interaction with economically attractive prospec-
tive spouses. Including men not in the labor force is especially important
in our race comparisons because the unemployment rate misrepresents
racial differences in joblessness (Lichter 1988). Moreover, racial differ-
ences in nonparticipation rates have widened considerably over the past
decade or so (Hirschman 1988).

Third, the modernization or urbanization argument suggests that inter-
area variation in marriage patterns can be explained in part by the loca-
tion of LMAs along a rural-urban continuum. For obvious reasons,
census data do not provide completely satisfactory measures. We nev-
ertheless consider three measures: (1) log of LMA population size, (2)
percentage of population living on farms, and (3) the urban percentage
in the LMA as defined by the census.* We use both population size and
percentage urban because some thinly populated areas (e.g., those in the
Great Plains states) have surprisingly high urban percentages yet would
be considered rural by almost any standard definition. These variables
measure various aspects of local urbanization and, by extension, serve
as proxies for spatial differences in family-related values.

Finally, we include four additional control variables in our models.
The mean education of women is included as a control because education
is sometimes used as proxy measure of permanent income and is expected
to vary inversely with incentives to marry (Sweet and Bumpass 1987).
Moreover, in our examination of the financial independence argument,
it is important to evaluate the effects of female employment rates and
£80" BIL" patiteul-1ave jo uontodorg.  tttttttteteteee peliteul 19Aq
isayed aseureyy

as wea uonduosaq aqqeie,

 

SNOILVIAG( GUVGNVIS GNV ‘SNVAJ ‘SHTAVIEVA JO NOLLaTaOSaq

T aTavL
97"

eee"

“62-02 pase usutom paren pue pateu Apuacel ay) sapnpdUT ,,ySU 3e,, uoneindod 10 loyeurwousp ay], »

poued reak-aay

snotaaad ut payerstu-ut

oym “67-02 pase ‘uauiom parreut
Apuasas Jo uonrodoig

 

“patent ATuacer
® Virtually every study of black-white differences in marriage rates is plagued by
potential problems associated with the differential black undercount (Schoen and
Kluegel 1988; Preston and Richards 1975; O’Hare 1988). The present study is no
exception. The problem is most acute in the calculation of sex-ratio imbalances be-
cause black male undercount will exaggerate male deficits. Consequently, in our mod-
els of marriage rates we include an indicator of percentage black so that any observed
sex-ratio effect is not a statistical artifact of the fact that LMAs with a high percentage
of blacks will also have low sex ratios.

7 The inclusion of in-migration as a control variable largely removes the alternative
explanation that local area variation in female marriage rates is simply a function of
local areas’ differences in the in-migration of married females. By including this
variable, we also substantially reduce the possibility that any observed relationship
between marriage-market conditions (e.g., female employment) and local marriage-
market areas is due to their common association with the local in-migration of married
females (i.e., that the relationship is spurious). In the end, controlling for in-migration
has relatively little, if any, effect on our substantive conclusions. In-migration is not
controlled in models of the ever married because the proportions ever married for
migrants and nonmigrants were not statistically different.

® One LMA in Arizona was eliminated because it contained a majority proportion of
Native Americans and Hispanics.
“100° > d tax
‘10’ > d +x
“SO > dx
“soyed
ageLizeur 79901 Jo [apour Ur Pasn st payeuL AAUaIeI ay} JO UONwAByUI-UT opty ‘Saye aBeLIIEUI JUALIN Jo [epour ay} UT Pash St parzeW APUAaLIND ay} Jo uoTAs-Uy q
“sre][op Jo spuesnoy} uy y
*syue1oyJ209 Paziprepuyys (sasayzuared ut) pure djeur ze UdAIZ sonTeA “Ike = N—"SLON

 

        

      

 

 

L8°LL yl ss JSR ttt tteseeeetensreetersecccecececececceecssesescessesececeeeesee recs 7a paysnipy
aeax(€LT") SIT" aaa(8TT") sor" . ++ quoryes3yu-uy
wxxx(ZTZ'—) 200° — aax(VOT’—) 700° — see (6ET —) TOO i iritrierteeerreeesteceeeseceeecseeessreeeeses “+ ypelq aBequao1eg
wax(8SZ°—) 76° — xax(S6T'—) £98" — we(OOT—) LOT — rr errttrteteseerecestenecenerceeereeeeessecessteceeecs JuawT[oIUa JooyIS
xxx(I8T°—) £0" — xxx(€bZ°—) SSO" — see (PSE) PRO er reereerereerereterereneneeeceesneessreenersgresees uoreonpe efeuieg

SSaTQUUeA [290] 12NIO
(sto’) 2000" (440° —) £000° — (8%0") 2000"  ueqiq
seex(b8T) 700° xxx(6T') 700° (190°) 200° ue
x4(802°—) 2T0°— xax(82Z°—) 90° — xxx(O0Z—) O£0°— * uonendod 807
suoreztueqig,
wxa(¥9Z") 710° wae(Z2Z) 210° wex(LEZ) PTO" *ssuIUIeA OTe
ax(Z80°—)  €71°— #(ZS0°—) 060°— ax(€60'—)  LOT'— quouro[dursuou areyy
(Ts0") 880" +(€r0') 090" (2£0°) 80" > ones xg
:Apgeyreae asnodg
xx(00T'—) TIO°— xxxl(€9T°—) 220° — xxx(0€Z'—) 70° — ,20URISISse ITIGNg
xxx(€ZZ'—) p10" — xax(S6T°—) §TO°— ax(Z€T'—) O10" — *SSulUIee aeulAT
xxx(SZT—) £91 #(L90°—) LOT — (200°) £00° * quoursojdure ayewa.y
saquapuadaput s1mW0U0Iq
evr 66S'T 9ET'Z ** queysuod
paueyy pause parse
Aqquacay Apuaing, Aq

 

 

67-02 ADV SATVWNAY AO SALVY TOVIAAVI, VIN'T 40 STAGOP] NOISSaMOTY SAAWNOS LSVA']T GALHOIGM

@ ATaVL
° Studies of the effects of welfare availability on family structure contain many meth-
odological and interpretative difficulties, which have contributed to conflicting or
ambiguous results (see Wilson [1987] for a review of this literature). Local welfare-
support levels presumably affect marriage rates in two ways. High levels of public
assistance (e.g., Aid to Families with Dependent Children) may depress marriage rates
by causing women to choose unmarried motherhood as an alternative to marriage.
Welfare availability may also make divorce or separation a viable option for married
women (thus lowering the proportion of currently married women). Ellwood and
Bane (1985), e.g., have produced rather consistent evidence supporting the latter
interpretation.

10 One reviewer suggested that the female-gains-to-marriage hypothesis could best be
evaluated by a measure of the ratio of female to male earnings. In an earlier version
of this paper (Lichter, LeClere, and McLaughlin 1989), we included this variable in
models of current and recent marriage rates. As expected, this earnings ratio had
statistically significant and negative effects on these rates. We thank Valerie Oppenhei-
mer for pointing out that one problem with this ratio measure is that its effect may
operate through male earnings, female earnings, or both—without allowing us to tell
which. Consequently, the present analysis separates this single earnings-ratio variable
into its two constituent effects.

1 Previous studies by Preston and Richards (1975) and White (1981) have estimated
ordinary least squares regression models of proportions ever married. However, be-
cause proportions have a limited range (i.e., 0-1), standard regression techniques may
inappropriately produce predicted values of marriage proportions lying outside this
range. Consequently, we have estimated the models in table 2 with dependent vari-
ables transformed into logits (Cohen and Cohen 1975). The results largely reproduce
the substantive conclusions we have drawn from the models reported in table 2. These
results are available from the authors on request.
recently married or ever married (table 2, cols. 3 and 1). Such results
imply that the recent interest in the link between sex-ratio imbalances
and marital behavior may be misplaced.’ Indeed, the results indicate
that local area variations in marriage have less to do with the overall
scarcity of males than with the relative scarcity of males who are econom-
ically attractive to women as potential marital partners (see the rows for
male nonemployment and male earnings in table 2). For example, higher
male nonemployment rates are negatively associated with all three mar-
riage rates.'* Moreover, the marital effects of the men’s average annual
earnings are even stronger (compare standardized coefficients), exceeding
the effects of women’s average annual earnings.

The significance of these results is further reinforced by the fact that
the increment to R? for the three demographic supply measures (i.e., sex
ratio, male nonemployment, and male earnings) exceeds that of the three
measures of female financial independence. The three male-supply vari-
ables explain an additional 14.6%, 16.1%, and 14.9% of the inter-LMA
variation in proportions ever married, currently married, and recently
married, respectively, when added to a model that includes all other
variables listed in table 2 (data not shown). In contrast, the three female
financial independence variables explain an additional 14.2%, 14.7%,
and 9.7% of the R’ of proportions ever married, currently married, and
recently married, respectively. One implication seems clear: marriage
rates among females may have as much to do with the economic circum-
stances of potential male partners as with the women’s own opportunities
for employment and economic independence. '*
The final argument, that the retreat from marriage is linked to the
process of urbanization, has considerable support (see Trovato [1988]
for similar conclusions using very different measures of urbanization).
Although the percentage urban is largely unrelated to local marriage
rates, less populated LMAs and those with high percentages of farm
population evidently have relatively high marriage rates (table 2). Such
results are significant on two counts. First, they reinforce long-standing
arguments that urbanization and industrialization undermine traditional
patterns of early and universal marriage. Second, and perhaps more
important, these effects are observed independently of other local eco-
nomic and demographic conditions (at least those included in our mod-
els). One interpretation, of course, is that the effects of urbanization/
modernization operate primarily through changes in traditional family
values instead of indirectly through changing local structural conditions
typically associated with marriage (e.g., by increasing opportunities for
female employment). Such an inference is clearly consistent with ideas
of the continuing importance of traditional family and kinship ties in less
populated agricultural areas (Landale 1989; Heaton et al. 1989).

Finally, the control variables of mean female education, school enroll-
ment, in-migration, and percentage black affect each of the marriage
rates in expected directions. It is especially noteworthy that the racial
composition of LMAs affects marriage rates, regardless of local economic
and demographic conditions and the extent of urbanization. This begs
the question of there being local sources of interarea variation in family
structure among black and white females in the United States, an issue
to which we now turn.
rently married because an insufficient sample size precludes the examina-
tion of proportions recently married.

The WLS models in table 3 provide two general conclusions regarding
black-white differences in proportions married. First, it is clear that local
conditions (at least those considered here) are much less efficacious in
explaining interarea variation in black marriage patterns than in white
ones. The R’s for blacks are 55.98 and 63.60 for the models of propor-
tions ever married and currently married, respectively. For white females
in the same LMAs, the corresponding R’s are 89.76 and 87.48. Such a
racial difference is apparently consistent with Schoen and Kluegel’s
(1988) conclusion that lower marriage rates among black women are more
a function of personal propensities to marry or not than of structural or
marriage-market conditions that constrain marriage.

Second, the racial differences in the effects of local marriage-market
conditions on marriage rates are mostly a matter of degree rather than
kind (i.e., direction). Obviously, the power of our statistical tests is re-
duced because of our small N (i.e., 104 LMAs), but it is reassuring that
most of the regression coefficients in the models are in the expected direc-
tion. For both blacks and whites, the financial independence argument,
for example, finds support primarily in the significant negative effects of
welfare availability on local marriage rates. On the other hand, local
female employment opportunities and earnings are largely unrelated to
white marriage rates (in the racially mixed LMAs and in all LMAs).
Only one of the eight coefficients is statistically significant. For African-
American women, the results indicate that local female employment rates
(b = —.22) and mean female earnings (b = —.20) are negatively related
to proportions currently married (but unrelated to proportions ever mar-
ried). Such results provide some support for the inference that the female
economic independence hypothesis is more applicable to African-Ameri-
can women than to white women.

As with the national results (table 2), the data from racially mixed
LMAs provide only modest support for the sex-ratio explanation of cur-
rent marriage patterns. To be sure, the ratio of males to females is posi-
tively related, as expected, to white and black female marriage rates, but
these effects are not significant when conventional statistical criteria are
used.'® In contrast, the average for black male earnings is positively
“100° > d xx

‘IO’ > d ax

“S0° > de

“UsTIOM patizeUr ApWasINd Jo uoReAZw-uy g

“sre[Jop Jo spuesnoy Uy »

“syUatdyjo0d paziprepurys (sasayjzuared ul) pue IIj}eUL are UaAIS sanjfeA— "ALON

 

       

 

    

 

 

 

 

09°¢9 94°68 es"€8 12°78 2 paisnipy
xax(€E") 19s" 7 7 #(40°) — L$0° 7 quoryerztUU-uy
(vO"-) £40" (zo’) TO" wx(0Z'—) SSE°—  aeex(ZT—) TZ “7 quauaTporue Jooyss
(st) z¢0° wex(0S"—) €21'—  wea(L2"—) 8S0°— ex(6€°—) 480° — * uoneonpe afewag
SO|GUIEA [E90] Jy}
(so"—) 2000° (2o"—) 1000" — x(II°—) T00°— (10°) zo000° ueqin.
(bT) 400° (80°) 900" #xa(ZT*) £00" (bo) too  uueg
(so"—) £00" xx(0f"—) $20°'— xxa(Th’"—) 9€0°-  eae(2Z'—) STO'—  eax(Ob"-)  6Z0"- + uoneindod 807
ruoreztueqin,
#x(62°) TIO" aa(ST') oto" aex(1Z) 110° xx(6T) 110° * SBuluTes oe,
ax(€E°—) 297° (S0"—) 660°— (40"-) 991°-— —ee(8O"—) THT — exe(ZT'—) — STZ"— * quourAojdursuou ope
(O) abr" (go) 990° +(S0°) #90" (¢0°) Tso" * one xag
:Aiqeyreae asnodg
xx(b@"—) S£0° xex(8Z"—) £0 sexl€E'—)  SbO"— —enn(IZ'-) 620°— ee(9Z"—-) 80° — soURASISSE ONQng
x(02°—) O10" (40) 100° #x(91'—) 210° — (90°-) 00" — *s8ururee ayewey
x(22°-) g6r" (10"-) g10°— (0°) z40" (so"-) ¢80°- (Zo"-) —-4¢0°- quaursojdwia apeway
saouepuadaput s1wW0U0dq
Ter” LLS°% 6r9°T 912% *queysu0D
pase pause pee paureyy
Apueimng PAT Apuaimng Aq
aa (Ig¢ = A) SLIM

 

N) SVW'I G3xIW ATIVIOVY

 

 

62-02 GIO ‘ASMAVI| ATLNAYUND ANV AaIWAVI AIAG SNOWLAOdONd FIVWAY NO SLOGsIY LAWAVIA-FOVIBAV] JO SALVINILSY 1aIOgGas-aOVY

¢ ATaVL
related to local proportions of black women ever married (b = .28) and
currently married (6 = .29), a result consistent with Wilson’s (1987)
argument that the deficit of black men with good jobs depresses the
marriage rates of black females. Moreover, the statistically significant
negative effect of the nonemployment rate of African-American men on
proportions currently married () = —.33) gives additional support to
Wilson’s thesis. Such results suggest that the simple focus on the supply
of men per se is perhaps misplaced. At the same time, the data in table
3 make it clear that this observation is also applicable to white females.
Indeed, for all LMAs (table 3, cols. 1 and 2), local male nonemployment
and earnings affect female marriage rates as hypothesized. For the 104
racially mixed LMAs, white women’s marriage rates are significantly
affected by the availability of men with higher earnings. The marital
behavior of white women, like that of African-American women, is
rooted (at least in part) in the local supply of economically attractive
potential partners.

These racial similarities in local marriage-market effects obviously call
into question marriage-market-based explanations of racial differences
in marital behavior. Indeed, we cannot conclude here that black-white
differences in marriage-market conditions are entirely—or even
mostly—responsible for black-white differences in marriage rates. This
inference is based on some additional analysis, provided in table 4, of a
black-white concatenated or “stacked” file of 208 observations. Each
record or unit of observation in this analysis pertains to a particular
race-LMA combination.!” The model also includes a dummy indicator
variable (i.e., black = 1) that identifies whether the record pertains to
black or white marriage-market conditions and marriage rates. The logic
of our analysis is straightforward. If black-white differences in marriage
rates are due entirely to black-white differences in marriage-market op-
“100° > d xxx

‘10’ > d xx

‘SO’ > dx

“UsWIOM patlreUl AMUSIINS Jo uoTeISTUI-UT g

“sIe]Jop JO spuesnoy} Uy »

“syUaldyJo09 paziprepurys (sasayjuared ul) pue Meu! are UaATS sanjeA— “ALON

 

 

  

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

96°88 eles 61'98 v's “Wy paysn(py
wexn(S9°—) 061’ — 7 ” wxa(LS'—)  8bT— nee prosar yelg
(go) T€0° xae(€2Z’) e1z - ieee quonessrur-uy
(so-—) sot — (g0°'—-)  g¢z°— (zo) 240" (SO°) STD rerrrrrttrrtrtttttesesstttressseeeessseeseeeeees JueUlTJoIUe JooyDS
xax(0Z'—) 250° — HET —) 280° — —xaex(SE°—) 780° ——ee(ZZ7—) SOOT tt terrrerree reese reeeeererereeeees uoneonpa afeuegy
{S9QeLIVA [IO] IO
(90°'—) sooo’— —x(bT"—) 100" (0") £000" (zo’) 2000" ueqiq
x(0T') 600° aex(€T") z10° (60°) 800° (IT) 600° ue
(@1"-) zt0'— (00°) £0000" wx(EZ>—) (€Z0°—)—aea(EZ"—) LOT ertrererettt eset seeeeeseeseeeeesees uonendod 307
suoryeziueqin.
sese($Z") sto" seex(6€") £70" awax(Z2") LTO" e077) O10 ee *SSUIUIvA OTe
a(IT'—) 8ST°'—  xxx(9Z7"—) OSE" — (Ol'—) @2t—  xex(T€"—) 98e°— “* quaursojdurauou areyy
(so) 190° ana(ZZ’) 617° (20°) 780° ea(€Z") TAZ" “ones xag
sAqeyreae asnods
wxx(ZZ°—) £0" — (80°-) TO" xennlbe°—) 7S0°'——xen(9Z°"—) THO" — aoueysisse Jyqng
xa(PT'—) €T0°'—  eea(LZ°"—) 970° — a(2U'—) TI0°"—  xxa(ZZ'—) 020°- + sBurusve apeuiey
(€0'—) 9%0"— (90°) 080° (20°) 0£0" (Ot) = OzT” + quoursojdura ayeuea.y
‘aouapuadepul ITuIOUDIy
69r'T OL" £26'T 90¢'T “+ yueysuoc
7 PPOW T PPO @ PPO T PPO
darMavy, ATLNaWAND Gareavy YIAq

 

 

ANg AIAOVIS ‘62-07 SADY ‘CAWAVI ATLNAWAAD ANV GAWAV] AIAY SNOLLAOAOA ATVWAY NO SLOAIT] LAXAV-AOVIVAV] 40 SALVINILSY

v aTaVvL
portunities (e.g., racial differences in sex ratios or the availability of
economically attractive men), then the race-indicator variable should be
statistically insignificant. The results in table 4 indicate that this is not
the case.

For example, results of model 1 that pertain to LMA proportions ever
married indicate that local conditions explain over 81% of the interarea
variation in marriage rates. When the race-indicator variable is added in
model 2, a significant increment to R’ is achieved. Indeed, the race coef-
ficient is larger than any other variable in the model (6 = —.57). The
metric coefficient of — .148 for the race-indicator variable means that the
proportion of ever-married black females is 148 lower than that of white
females, net of racial differences in local marriage-market conditions.
Similarly, the average LMA proportion of currently married African-
American women is .190 lower than that of white women (model 2 of
currently married rates). By almost any definition, these are large differ-
ences. Racial differences in marriage rates occur independently of racial
differences in local marriage-market opportunities or disincentives for
marriage, at least for those LMA characteristics measured here. These
apparently large black-white differences in marital propensities are con-
sistent with the more spatially circumscribed results of Schoen and
Kluegel (1988) for Virginia and North Carolina.
especially along a rural-urban continuum. Our measures of local area
urbanization, which perhaps best represent the effects of changing family
values in a modern society, appear to be an important part of any expla-
nation of interarea variation in marital behavior. On the other hand, the
current preoccupation with sex-ratio imbalances seems misplaced, given
the relatively meager evidence presented here. Instead, our analysis has
revealed that the local economic circumstances of both females and pro-
spective male partners contribute significantly to spatial variations in
patterns of marital behavior. Especially important is that the supply of
economically attractive men plays an unusually large and—except for
Wilson (1987)—heretofore unappreciated role in defining young women’s
marital prospects or incentives for marriage.

The substantive implications here are nontrivial. Our results do little
to discount claims that the increasing economic independence of women
has eroded a fundamental basis for marriage (Becker 1981). But our
results are also consistent with the view that the marital behavior of
American women has been greatly affected by the deteriorating economic
circumstances of young men, whose real earnings have declined over the
past decade (see Oppenheimer 1988; Bennett et al. 1989). The past em-
phasis on individual or micro models of female marriage (Marini 1978;
Goldscheider and Waite 1986) may have been misplaced, especially in
those studies that include female background and socioeconomic charac-
teristics (e.g., employment status) in models of marital status transitions
but ignore marriage-market conditions altogether. Indeed, recent re-
search has emphasized individual choices rather than structural con-
straints on marriage. As Oppenheimer (1988) has suggested, delayed
marriage among females may have more to do with (unmeasured) em-
ployment circumstances of prospective male spouses than with young
women’s financial resources. Our analysis clearly reinforces Oppenhei-
mer’s interpretation.

Racial differences in marriage and family behavior (e.g., in the preva-
lence of female heads of families and illegitimacy) remain a perplexing
issue that defies facile explanations. Subcultural explanations, rooted
largely in the black historic experience of slavery, have given way to
recent arguments emphasizing the tenuous economic underpinnings of
African-American family life (Walker 1988; Wilson 1987; Bennett et al.
1989) and sex-ratio imbalances (Spanier and Glick 1980; Teachman et
al. 1987). We have provided some of the best local area evidence to date
supporting the conclusions of Wilson (1987) and others (Testa et al. 1989;
Tucker and Taylor 1989) that marriage-market conditions, especially
deficits in the supply of economically attractive black men, affect the
marital prospects of black women. While our data indicate that we can-
not dismiss cultural explanations of black-white differences in marriage
(e.g., see table 4; also, Walker 1988), racial differences in local marriage-
market conditions—especially economic conditions—clearly play a part
in racially based differences in marriage. Indeed, the apparent retreat
from traditional family structures may be located in black men’s dete-
riorating employment circumstances (Hirschman 1988; Farley 1984),
particularly in metropolitan central cities where over half of these young
African-American men today are jobless, employed part-time, or working
at poverty-level wages (Lichter 1988; Wilson and Neckerman 1986). It is
difficult to minimize the significance of the apparently fragile economic
underpinnings of black family life and marital behavior in the United
States. At the same time, our results indicate that local economic condi-
tions provide only a partial explanation for continuing black-white differ-
ences in marital behavior.

Finally, our prime objective has been to emphasize the spatial dimen-
sion of marriage markets, and the PUMS-D has provided a unique data
source for this purpose. To be sure, marriage markets have other dimen-
sions (e.g., the organizational context, which includes churches and
clubs) that sometimes transcend spatial boundaries. But, as our study
has illustrated, local marriage-market conditions nevertheless play a fun-
damental and often unappreciated role in the marital search process of
American women.
Fossett, Mark A., and K. Jill Kiecolt. 1990. “A Methodological Review of the Sex
Ratio: Alternatives for Comparative Research.” Paper no. 11.08. University of
Texas, Texas Population Research Center, Austin.

Fuguitt, Glenn V., David L. Brown, and Calvin L. Beale. 1989. Rural and Small
Town America. New York: Russell Sage.

Goldman, Noreen, Charles F. Westoff, and Charles Hammerslough. 1984. “Demog-
raphy of the Marriage Market in the United States.” Population Index 50:5-25.
Goldscheider, Frances Kobrin, and Linda J. Waite. 1986. “Sex Differences in the

Entry into Marriage.” American Journal of Sociology 92:91—109.

Goode, William J. 1963. Work Revolution and Family Patterns. New York: Free
Press.

Grossbard-Shechtman, Shoshana A. 1981. “A Market Theory of Marriage and Spouse
Selection.” Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Population Association of
America, Washington, D.C.

. 1984. “A Theory of Allocation of Time in Markets for Labour and Marriage.”
The Economic Journal 94:863-82.

Guttentag, Marcia, and Paul F. Secord. 1983. Too Many Women? Beverly Hills,
Calif.: Sage.

Hareven, Tamara K. 1976. “Modernization and Family History: Perspectives on
Social Change.” Signs 2:190-206.

Heaton, Tim B., Daniel T. Lichter, and Acheampong Amoateng. 1989. “The Timing
of Family Formation: Rural-Urban Differentials in First Intercourse, Childbirth,
and Marriage.” Rural Sociology 54:1-16.

Hirschman, Charles. 1988. “Minorities in the Labor Market: Cyclical Patterns and
Secular Trends in Joblessness.” Pp. 63-85 in Divided Opportunities, edited by
G. D. Sandefur and M. Tienda. New York: Plenum.

Hogan, Dennis P. 1978. “The Effects of Demographic Factors, Family Background,
and Early Job Achievement on Age at Marriage.” Demography 15:161—76.

. 1989. “An Entrenched Underclass.” Family Planning Perspectives 21 (Janu-
ary/February): 44-45.

Kiecolt, K. Jill, and Mark A. Fossett. 1989. “Mate Availability, Economic Opportu-
nity, and Marital Quality among Black Americans.” Paper presented at the annual
meeting of the American Sociological Association, San Francisco.

Landale, Nancy S. 1989. “Marriage and Agriculture Structure.” Rural Sociology
54:439-55.

Lichter, Daniel T. 1988. “Racial Differences in Underemployment in American
Cities.” American Journal of Sociology 93:771-92.

Lichter, Daniel T., and Janice A. Costanzo. 1987. “How Do Demographic Changes
Affect Labor Force Participation of Women?” Monthly Labor Review 110 (Novem-
ber): 23-25.

Lichter, Daniel T., Tim B. Heaton, and Glenn V. Fuguitt. 1986. “Convergence in
Black and White Population Redistribution in the United States.” Social Science
Quarterly 67:21-38.

Lichter, Daniel T., Felicia B. LeClere, and Diane K. McLaughlin. 1989. “Downsizing
Marriage Markets: The Effects of Local Conditions on Marriage Patterns in U.S.
Labor Market Areas.” Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Population
Association of America, Baltimore.

Marini, Margaret Mooney. 1978. “The Transition to Adulthood: Sex Differences
in Educational Attainment and Age at Marriage.” American Sociological Review
43:483-507.

Michael, Robert T., and Nancy Brandon Tuma. 1985. “Entry into Marriage and
Parenthood by Young Men and Women: The Influence of Family Background.”
Demography 22:515—44.

Murray, Charles. 1984. Losing Ground. New York: Basic.
Neter, John, William Wasserman, and Michael Kutner. 1985. Applied Linear Statisti-
cal Models, Regression, Analysis of Variance and Experimental Design, 2d ed.
Homewood, Ill.: Irwin.

O’Hare, William. 1988. “An Evaluation of Three Theories regarding the Growth of
Black Female-headed Families.” Journal of Urban Affairs 10:183-97.

Oppenheimer, Valerie Kincade. 1988. “A Theory of Marriage Timing.” American
Journal of Sociology 94:563-91.

Preston, Samuel H., and Alan Thomas Richards. 1975. “The Influence of Women’s
Work Opportunities on Marriage Rates.” Demography 12:209-22.

Rodgers, Willard, and Arland Thornton. 1985. “Changing Patterns of First Marriage
in the United States.” Demography 22:265-79.

Sawhill, Isabel. 1977. “Economic Perspectives on the Family.” Daedalus 106:115-25.

Schoen, Robert. 1983. “Measuring the Tightness of a Marriage Squeeze.” Demogra-
phy 20:61-78.

Schoen, Robert, and James R. Kluegel. 1988. “The Widening Gap in Black and
White Marriage Rates: The Impact of Population Composition and Differential
Marriage Propensities.” American Sociological Review 53:895—907.

South, Scott J., and Katherine Trent. 1988. “Sex Ratios and Women’s Roles: A
Cross-national Analysis.” American Journal of Sociology 93:1096-1115.

Spanier, Graham B., and Paul C. Glick. 1980. “Mate Selection Differentials between
Whites and Blacks in the United States.” Social Forces 58:707-25.

Sweet, James A., and Larry Bumpass. 1987. American Families and Households.
New York: Russell Sage.

Teachman, Jay D., Karen A. Polonko, and Geoffrey K. Leigh. 1987. “Marital Tim-
ing: Race and Sex Comparisons.” Social Forces 66:239-68.

Testa, Mark, Nan Marie Astone, Marilyn Krogh, and Kathryn M. Neckerman. 1989.
“Employment and Marriage among Inner-City Fathers.” Annals of the American
Academy of Social and Political Sciences 501:79-91.

Tickamyer, Ann, and Janet Bokemeier. 1988. “Sex Differences in Labor-Market
Experiences.” Rural Sociology 53:166-89.

Tolbert, Charles M., III. 1989. “Labor Market Areas in Stratification Research:
Concepts, Definitions, and Issues.” Pp. 81-97 in Research in Rural Sociology, vol.
4. Edited by W. Falk and T. Lyson. Greenwich, Conn.: JAI.

Tolbert, Charles, and Molly Killian. 1987. Labor Market Areas for the United States.
Washington, D.C.: Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service, Ag-
ricultural and Rural Economics Division.

Trovato, Frank. 1988. “A Macrosociological Analysis of Change in the Marriage
Rate: Canadian Women, 1921-25 to 1981-85.” Journal of Marriage and the Family
50:507-21.

Tucker, M. Belinda, and Robert Joseph Taylor. 1989. “Demographic Correlates of
Relationship Status among Black Americans.” Journal of Marriage and the Family
51:655-65.

Walker, Henry A. 1988. “Black-White Differences in Marriage and Family Pat-
terns.” Pp. 87-112 in Feminism, Children and the New Families, edited by S. M.
Dornbusch and M. H. Strober. New York: Guilford.

White, Lynn K. 1981. “A Note on Racial Differences in the Effect of Female Opportu-
nity on Marriage Rates.” Demography 18:349-54.

Wilson, William Julius. 1987. The Truly Disadvantaged. Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press.

Wilson, William Julius, and Kathryn M. Neckerman. 1986. “Poverty and Family
Structure: The Widening Gap between Evidence and Public Policy Issues.” Pp.
232-59 in Fighting Poverty, edited by S. H. Danziger and D. H. Weinberg. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
